Instructions for use of the document (to be deleted before issuing):
Items highlighted in yellow are to be completed/modified;
Items highlighted in green constitute information;
Items highlighted in grey are “Options” to be selected depending on the needs.
You find here the link with direct access to the One TotalEnergies General Terms - Clause by Clause
guide to help you during the drafting and/or the negotiation of OTGT templates n° A044 and A045 (English
versions).
MASTER CONTRACT FOR SUPPLY OF GOODS AND/OR SERVICES
PART 1 – FORM OF AGREEMENT
The Master Contract is made between:
(1) [NAME OF TOTALENERGIES COMPANY], a company incorporated under the laws of [insert
jurisdiction of incorporation], whose registered office is located at [insert company’s registered
address], registered under company number [insert company’s company registration number]
(“Customer Signatory”); and
(2) [NAME OF SUPPLIER], a company incorporated under the laws of [insert jurisdiction of
incorporation], whose registered office is located at [insert company’s registered address],
registered under company number [insert company’s company registration number] (“Supplier
Signatory”).
WHEREAS:
A Supplier Group is engaged in the business of providing the Goods and/or the Services and
represents that it has the required skills and knowledge in providing the Goods and/or the
Services.
B In reliance upon such skills and knowledge, Customer Signatory and its Affiliates may procure the
Goods and/or Services from Supplier Group.
C Upon request of Customer Signatory or any of its Affiliates, Supplier Signatory has agreed to
provide, or to procure that its Affiliates provide, the Goods and/or the Services in accordance with
the Contract.
Page 1 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
D [To be completed on a case by case basis]
Now in consideration of the mutual promises set out in this Contract, the Parties hereby agree as
follows:
(1) In the Master Contract, all capitalised words and expressions shall have the meanings given to
them in this Part 1 - Form of Agreement or elsewhere in the Master Contract.
(2) The following Parts shall be deemed to form and be read and construed as part of the Contract,
and shall be read as one document:
Part Contents
PART 1 Form of Agreement
PART 2 Form of Order Request
PART 3 General Terms (“GT”), including:
scheDULE 3.1 – GOODS LIST
SCHEDULE 3.2 – SERVICES LIST
SCHEDULE 3.3 – FINANCIAL TERMS AND AMOUNTS FOR
LATE PERFORMAN
SCHEDULE 3.4 – PREVENTION OF ILLEGAL EMPLOYMENT POLICY
SCHEDULE 3.5 – ANTI-CORRUPTION POLICY
SCHEDULE 3.6 – FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF
PURCHASING (FPP)
SCHEDULE 3.7 – HYGIENE, SAFETY, AND THE
ENVIRONMENT POLICY
SCHEDULE 3.8 – INSURANCES
SCHEDULE 3.9 – CYBERSECURITY REQUIREMENTS
PART 4 Specific Terms
Page 2 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
Part Contents
PART 5 Form of Local Implementation Contract / Local Terms
In case of conflict, inconsistency or ambiguity between these different parts, the order of
precedence indicated below shall apply:
1. Form of Agreement
2. Local Implementation Contract / Local Terms (if any)
3. Specific Terms (if any)
4. General Terms
5. Form of Order Request/Order
(3) Customer Signatory or any of its Affiliates may request that a member of Supplier Group provide
Goods and/or Services in accordance with the Master Contract. Supplier shall procure that
members of Supplier Group shall accept such orders and shall provide the Goods and/or Services
as provided in the Contract.
(4) The Master Contract shall apply from _________________________ (the “Effective Date”), and
remain in full force and effect for a period of _________________________ unless: (i) terminated
earlier in accordance with its terms; or (ii) extended in accordance with Clause (5) of this Part 1 –
Form of Agreement (“Term”).
(5) Customer Signatory may extend the Master Contract for [●] ([●]) successive terms not to exceed
[●] ([●]) months each, by giving notice in writing, [●] ([●]) months before the end of the initial
period specified in Clause (4) of this Part 1 – Form of Agreement or, if applicable, [●] ([●]) months
before the end of each extended term. No compensation shall be owed to Supplier in the event
the Master Contract is not extended.
(6) Unless otherwise notified by each Party in Part 4 – Specific Terms of the Contract (which, in either
case, shall take precedence over this Clause 6 of this Part 1 – Form of Agreement), the addresses
for service of notice in accordance with this Master Contract shall be, or otherwise notified by
each Party:
Supplier Signatory Customer Signatory
[insert address details] [insert address details]
[insert telephone details] [insert telephone details]
[insert email details] [insert email details]
Page 3 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
(7) Should an Affiliate of the Customer Signatory and a member of the Supplier Group need to deviate
from the terms contained in Part 3 – General Terms or Part 4 - Specific Terms in order to comply
with the requirements of Applicable Laws, they shall enter into a Local Implementation Contract
in the form set out in Part 5 – Form of Local Implementation Contract and any Orders between
such parties shall be made pursuant thereto.
(8) No provision of the Master Contract shall be deemed to confer any exclusivity in favour of Supplier
or to constitute a commitment from Customer Signatory or its Affiliates to submit any Order
Request or to purchase Goods and/or Services.
The authorised representatives of the Parties have executed the Master Contract upon the dates indicated
below:
For: For:
(Supplier Signatory Name) (Customer Signatory Name)
Name: __________________ Name: __________________
Title: __________________ Title: __________________
Date: __________________ Date: __________________
Page 4 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
PART 2 – FORM OF ORDER REQUEST FOR THE PURCHASE OF XXX
[GOODS/SERVICES]
ORDER NO. XXX
Date: ………………………………………….
Note: Please refer to Clause Guide 5 - Order Requests and Orders for guidance on the mechanics of
the Order Requests and Orders.
This order is subject to the provisions of Master Contract no. XXX of day/month/year which was entered
into between [Name of the TOTALENERGIES entity signatory of the Contract] and the [Name of the
Supplier entity signatory of the Contract], and which shall be incorporated into this Order Request by
reference hereto.
[NAME OF CUSTOMER] whose registered office is located at […………………………….]
And
[NAME OF SUPPLIER] whose registered office is located at […………………………….]
Note: As per Part 2 of Clause Guide 5, some or all of the following paragraphs may need to be included.
Information in the Order Request should cover details not already included in Schedules 3.1 – Goods
List, 3.2 – Services List and 3.3 – Financial Terms and Amounts for Late Performance
1 PURPOSE AND DESCRIPTION OF [GOODS][SERVICES]
The Supplier is appointed to provide the following [Goods][Services]:
[Goods][Services]: [describe ordered Goods/Services (including reference number if available), and
quantity of each Good]
Delivery Date: [to be completed – Note: this refers to the date of delivery of the Goods or period of
performance of the Services]
Site: [include the location(s) where the Goods and/or the Services are required to be provided]
2 FINANCIAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS
2.1 PRICE
The price payable for the [Goods][Services] pursuant to this Order Request is [to be completed based on
the Goods/Services list].
Page 5 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
2.2 INVOICING ADDRESS
[To be completed]
2.3 DAMAGES FOR LATE PERFORMANCE AND MISPERFORMANCE
[If not otherwise specified in Schedule 3.3 of the Contract, include the rate of damages payable should
the Supplier fail to deliver the Goods and/or Services by the Delivery Date or fail to provide Goods
and/or Services that Conform]
3 CONDITIONS
[Include any specific conditions applicable to the delivery Site or the Site where the Services will be
performed]
4 COOPERATION OF THE PARTIES
Primary Contact Persons
Appointed by the Customer: Mr./Mrs. ….., tel.:…….., email address ……
Appointed by the Supplier: Mr./Mrs. ….., tel.:…….., email address …
…………………………………………………..
for and on behalf of Customer
We hereby acknowledge receipt of the Order Request:
…………………………………………………..
for and on behalf of Supplier
Page 6 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
PART 3 - GENERAL TERMS
1 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION ............................................................................................................. 8
2 SCOPE OF CONTRACT .................................................................................................................................. 11
3 MASTER CONTRACT AND OBLIGATIONS OF SUPPLIER SIGNATORY .............................................................. 11
4 AMENDMENTS TO GOODS LIST AND/OR SERVICES LIST .............................................................................. 11
5 ORDER REQUESTS AND ORDERS .................................................................................................................. 11
6 SEVERAL LIABILITY ....................................................................................................................................... 12
7 GOODS ........................................................................................................................................................ 12
8 SERVICES ..................................................................................................................................................... 13
9 ACCEPTANCE OF GOODS AND/OR SERVICES ................................................................................................ 14
10 SUPPLIER’S OBLIGATIONS ............................................................................................................................ 15
11 OTHER OBLIGATIONS................................................................................................................................... 15
12 AUDITS AND ACCOUNTING .......................................................................................................................... 16
13 PRICE, INVOICING AND PAYMENTS ............................................................................................................. 16
14 LATE PERFORMANCE OR MISPERFORMANCE .............................................................................................. 17
15 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ............................................................................................................................ 17
16 CONFIDENTIALITY ........................................................................................................................................ 19
17 LIABILITY AND INDEMNITIES ....................................................................................................................... 19
18 INSURANCE ................................................................................................................................................. 19
19 TERMINATION ............................................................................................................................................. 20
20 FORCE MAJEURE .......................................................................................................................................... 22
21 ASSIGNMENT ............................................................................................................................................... 23
22 SUBCONTRACTING ...................................................................................................................................... 23
23 TOTALENERGIES PRODUCTS ........................................................................................................................ 23
24 GENERAL PROVISIONS ................................................................................................................................. 24
25 THIRD PARTY RIGHTS................................................................................................................................... 25
26 GOVERNING LAW AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION ............................................................................................. 25
27 ECONOMIC SANCTIONS AND EXPORT CONTROL ......................................................................................... 26
Page 7 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
1 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION
1.1 DEFINITIONS
In the Contract, the following terms shall have the meanings set out below unless the context
requires otherwise:
Affected Party has the meaning assigned to it in Clause 27.
Affiliate means in relation to an entity, any other legal entity that Controls, is Controlled by, or is
Controlled by an entity that Controls a Party.
Applicable Laws means all laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, by-laws, decrees, orders and the
like, whether of governmental, federal, national or local authority or other agencies or other
authority having jurisdiction over the Parties, the Goods and/or Services, the Supplier’s equipment
or the Site, or any of them, and which are or may become applicable, including Sanctions Laws/
Regulations. References to any Applicable Laws shall be construed to include a reference to that
law as from time to time modified, amended, extended, re-enacted or consolidated, whether
before or after the date of the Contract and any subordinate legislation made pursuant to that law.
Conform means the Goods and/or Services:
(a) conform with (i) the specifications and description of the Goods and/or Services provided
pursuant to the Contract; (ii) Good Industry Practice; and (iii) any Applicable Laws, and
(b) are (i) free from defects in design, material and workmanship; and (ii) fit for any purpose
intended under the Contract.
Contract means (as the context may require) the Master Contract and/or an Order.
Control means the direct or indirect ownership of more than fifty percent (50%) of voting rights or
of the registered capital, and a “Change of Control” is deemed to include any contribution,
assignment, merger or other operation which modifies the Control, whether directly or indirectly,
of the Party. Controls or Controlled shall be construed accordingly.
Customer means Customer Signatory or any of its Affiliates submitting an Order Request for
provision of Goods and/or Services.
Effective Date for purposes of the Master Contract has the meaning given in Part 1 – Form of
Agreement.
Force Majeure means the effective occurrence of any act or event which is:
- unforeseeable,
- insurmountable,
- outside the control of the Party which invokes it , and
- which renders such Party unable to comply with whole or part of its obligations under the
Contract.
Provided such criteria are met all together, Force Majeure includes events such as acts of God
(epidemic, tidal wave, lightning, earthquake, hurricane, flooding), war (whether declared or not),
riots (other than among Supplier Personnel or Customer Personnel), civil or military disturbances,
national or regional strikes (except strikes, lock-outs or other industrial disputes or actions limited
to or originating with the Personnel of Supplier or its Subcontractors), any Applicable Laws (except
that Sanctions Laws/ Regulations enacted after the Effective Date shall be deemed unforeseeable),
and acts of any court, government or governmental authority or any representative thereof.
Page 8 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
- .
Good Industry Practice means any circumstances, practices, methods and procedures and that
degree of skill, diligence, prudence and foresight which would reasonably be expected to be
observed by a professional, skilled and experienced contractor engaged in carrying out activities
the same as, or similar to, those contemplated under the Contract under the same or similar
circumstances.
Goods means the goods or products (or any part of them) as described in the Contract, and in
particular in the Order Request and scheDULE 3.1 , or any specification for the Goods that is agreed
in writing by the Parties.
Local Implementation Contract means the contract entered into between a Supplier and a
Customer which shall incorporate the terms of the Master Contract as may be amended, by
reference thereto, in order to comply with the requirements of Applicable Laws.
Local Terms means the local terms and conditions in Part 5 of the Master Contract.
Mandatory Policies means Customer’s policies, including: (a) any specific internal site policies and
procedures provided to Supplier or any member of Supplier Group by Customer in respect of a Site;
(b) prevention of illegal employment policy (as set out in SCHEDULE 3.4); (c) anti-corruption policy
(as set out in SCHEDULE 3.5 ); (d) fundamental principles of purchasing (as set out in SCHEDULE 3.6
);(e) hygiene, safety, and the environment policy (as set out in SCHEDULE 3.7 ) ; and (f)
Cybersecurity Requirements (as set out in SCHEDULE 3.91).
Master Contract means the contract between Supplier Signatory and Customer Signatory in respect
of the provision of Goods and/or Services as described in Part 1 – Form of Agreement.
Order means the contract between Supplier and Customer formed when such Customer submits
an Order Request to such Supplier, for the provision of the Goods and/or Services as described in
the said Order Request.
Order Request means an order request issued by Customer for the provision of Goods and/or
Services from a member of Supplier Group either substantially similar to the form attached to this
Master Contract or issued electronically by the Customer to the Supplier (SAP).
Parties or Party means in relation to the Master Contract, the Customer Signatory and/or the
Supplier Signatory collectively or individually, and in relation to an Order, the Customer and/or the
Supplier collectively or individually, under such Order.
Personnel means directors, officers, employees, agents.
Restricted Person means any individual or entity which is listed, or is 50% or more (direct or
indirectly) owned or controlled (if control is used under the relevant Sanctions Laws / Regulations)
by any party listed, on a Sanctions List.
Sanctions Authority means any competent authority of: (a) the United States of America; or (b) the
European Union; or (c) the Republic of France, in charge of the enactment, administration,
implementation and enforcement of Sanctions Laws / Regulations.
Sanctions Laws / Regulations means any applicable economic, financial, export controlor trade
sanctions laws, regulations, embargoes or other restrictive measures enacted, administered,
implemented and/or enforced from time to time by any Sanctions Authority or an agency thereof.
Page 9 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
Sanctions List means any of the lists of designated sanctions targets whose assets are frozen and
maintained by the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the U.S. Department of the Treasury (the
specially designated nationals or blocked persons lists), by the European Union (the consolidated
list of persons, groups and entities subject to financial sanctions) or the Republic of France, each
such list as amended, supplemented or substituted from time to time.
Sanctioned Obligation has the meaning assigned to it in Article 27.2.
Services means the services to be provided by Supplier to Customer as described in the Contract,
and in particular in the Order Request and SCHEDULE 3.2 .
Site means the location(s) where the Goods and/or the Services are required to be provided, as
may be set out in the relevant Order Request.
Specific Terms means the specific terms and conditions in PART 4 of the Contract.
Subcontractor means subcontractors of any tier of Supplier performing any part of Supplier’s
obligations under the Contract.
Supplier means any member of Supplier Group who receives an Order Request.
Supplier Group means Supplier Signatory and any of its Affiliates and any of their respective
Personnel, or Subcontractors.
1.2 INTERPRETATION
(a) At any time and unless expressly stated otherwise, when the following expressions and
description and derivatives thereof appear in any part of the Contract, they shall be
construed as indicated below:
(i) “including”, “included”, “such as” and the like shall be deemed to be completed by the
expression “but not limited”;
(ii) “report”, “request”, “submit”, “notify”, “instruct”, “instruction”, “inform”, “consent”,
“approve”, “approval”, “approved” and the like shall be deemed to be completed by
the expression “in writing”; and
(iii) “property” and “equipment” shall be deemed to include property and equipment
owned, operated, hired, leased or otherwise provided by the relevant person.
(b) Where the context so requires, the singular includes the plural and vice versa.
(c) Headings and table of contents are inserted only for convenience and shall not in any way
limit or govern the construction of the Contract.
(d) Approval or instruction by Customer shall in no way be construed as relieving Supplier or
Supplier Signatory (as the case may be) of any its obligations, responsibilities or liabilities
under the Contract or otherwise.
(e) “In writing” or “written” means any communication made by letter, notice, email or through
any electronic ordering or invoicing system as detailed in the Contract.
(f) References to any person, including a Party, include that person’s successors in title and
transferees (unless the transfer to the successor in title or transferee was in breach of the
Contract). References to the Contract or any other document are references to the Contract
or that other document, as varied, novated, supplemented or replaced from time to time.
Page 10 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
(g) Each provision of the Contract shall be construed as having been negotiated by the Parties
and as though all Parties participated equally in the drafting of the same. Consequently, the
Parties acknowledge and agree that any rule of construction that a document is to be
construed against one of the Parties shall not be applicable to the Contract.
2 SCOPE OF CONTRACT
2.1 The scope of the Contract is the provision of Goods and/or Services.
2.2 When Supplier is providing Goods only, terms and conditions applicable to the Services only and all
references to them shall be deemed to be deleted.
2.3 When Supplier is providing Services only, terms and conditions applicable to the Goods only and all
references to them shall be deemed to be deleted.
2.4 When Supplier is providing Goods and Services, then all terms and conditions of the Contract shall
apply.
3 MASTER CONTRACT AND OBLIGATIONS OF SUPPLIER SIGNATORY
3.1 By entering into the Master Contract, Supplier Signatory agrees that Customer Signatory or any of
its Affiliates may submit an Order Request to a member of Supplier Group for the provision of Goods
and/or Services.
3.2 The Term of the Master Contract is set out in PART 1 – Form of Agreement.
3.3 The Goods and/or Services are listed in scheDULE 3.1 and/or SCHEDULE 3.2 and their applicable
prices for such Goods and/or Services (if any) are listed in SCHEDULE 3.3 .
3.4 Supplier Signatory shall procure that where a member of Supplier Group receives an Order Request
from any Customer, such member of Supplier Group shall acknowledge its receipt and shall provide
the relevant Customer with the requested Goods and/or Services pursuant to the terms of the GTs
and the Specific Terms, on the basis of the prices agreed in the Master Contract.
4 AMENDMENTS TO GOODS LIST AND/OR SERVICES LIST
Customer Signatory may, at any time, request in writing to Supplier Signatory that the list of Goods
in scheDULE 3.1 and/or the list of Services in SCHEDULE 3.2 is amended. Any such amendment shall
be made in accordance with Clause 24.6 of the GTs.
5 ORDER REQUESTS AND ORDERS
5.1 When no prices have been agreed for Goods and/or Services under SCHEDULE 3.3 , Customer may
request a price quotation from Supplier before sending an Order Request and Supplier shall respond
to such request within fourteen (14) days.
5.2 The Order Request shall refer to the GTs and any Specific Terms of the Master Contract related to
such Order Request which shall be incorporated by reference thereto.
5.3 Unless terminated earlier, any Order shall become effective from the date set out in the Order
Request or when submitted by Customer and shall continue in force until the date set out in such
Order Request or until all obligations under such Order have been fulfilled.
5.4 Should the Master Contract terminate or expire before completion of performance of any Order,
such Order shall remain in force and the provisions of the Master Contract will continue to apply to
that Order until completion of performance of such Order. For the avoidance of doubt, only
Page 11 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
Customer Signatory may terminate the Master Contract, and any Customer to an Order may
terminate the relevant Order in each case in accordance with their relevant terms.
6 SEVERAL LIABILITY
There will be no joint and several liability between Customer (or Customer Signatory), on the one
hand, and any of their respective Affiliates on the other hand. Consequently, Customer Signatory
shall remain solely responsible for the performance of its obligations towards Supplier Signatory
under the Master Contract, and, in respect of each Order, the relevant Customer shall remain solely
responsible for the performance of its obligations towards the relevant Supplier.
7 GOODS
7.1 This Clause 7 shall apply in respect of the provision of Goods only.
Delivery of Goods
7.2 Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, the Goods shall be delivered at the place (“Delivery Place”)
and on the date specified in the Order Request during normal business hours (“Delivery Date”).
Customer shall be entitled to modify the Delivery Place and Delivery Date by prior notice to
Supplier.
7.3 Any partial delivery is subject to Customer’s prior written consent.
7.4 Supplier shall be responsible for packing and transporting the Goods at its own costs to the Delivery
Place.
7.5 Packing shall be compliant with Good Industry Practice and appropriate for the Goods and the
means of transport used to prevent any damage to the Goods during transport, handling and
storage at Delivery Place. The Goods shall be duly identified and labelled by Supplier in compliance
with the Contract and Applicable Laws.
Failure to deliver
7.6 Without prejudice to Customer’s rights in Clause 14, if Supplier believes it may not be able to deliver
the Goods by the Delivery Date, Supplier shall immediately notify Customer and provide reasons
for such delay and appropriate corrective measures.
7.7 Should Supplier fail to deliver the Goods by the Delivery Date, Customer, at its sole discretion, (i)
shall be entitled to late performance damages as provided under Clause 14.1 and/or (ii) has the
right to have such Goods provided by a third party. The direct and documented costs incurred by
Customer in connection with the provision of the Goods by such third party shall be payable by
Supplier.
Transfer of ownership and risk of Goods
7.8 Ownership in the Goods shall transfer from Supplier to Customer on the earlier of:
(a) when the Goods can be identified as relating to the relevant Order Request;
(b) when Customer pays for the Goods or part thereof in accordance with the Contract; or
(c) at the time of acceptance by Customer in accordance with the Contract.
7.9 The risk in the Goods shall pass to Customer as per the latest edition of the Incoterms stipulated in
the Contract (or, if no Incoterm is specified, as per “Delivered Duty Paid - named place of
destination” (DDP), in accordance with the latest edition of Incoterms), without prejudice to any
right of rejection which may accrue to Customer under the Contract.
Page 12 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
7.10 The Goods shall be delivered free from any and all mortgages, pledges, security interests, liens,
levies, charges, claims, conditions, equitable interests, options, or other encumbrance or restriction
of any kind whatsoever.
Warranties in relation to Goods
7.11 Supplier and/or Supplier Signatory warrants the availability of the Goods during the Term.
7.12 Supplier warrants that the Goods shall comply in all respects with the Contract, and that they shall
Conform. (Insert the following if Master Contract governed by French or Belgian law (Clause 26.1))
For the avoidance of doubt, the fact that the Goods shall comply in all respects with the Contract
and that they shall Conform shall be construed as an obligation de résultat.
7.13 Should any of the Goods not Conform within either (i) twelve (12) months from the date when such
Goods are used for the first time , or (ii) eighteen (18) months from the Delivery Date of such Goods,
whichever period ends first (“Goods Warranty Period”), and Supplier is so notified during such
Goods Warranty Period, then Supplier shall replace or rework, as directed by Customer and at
Customer's sole discretion, the Goods that do not Conform , within the timeline specified by
Customer with minimum disruption to Customer’s operations.
7.14 Replacement or rework of the Goods shall be carried out at Supplier’s cost and risk, and shall include
expenses and costs relating to packing, transportation to or from Supplier’s manufacturing location,
assistance to remove or install, and tests when necessary to confirm that such Goods Conform.
7.15 Supplier warrants the Goods replaced or reworked in accordance with Clause 7.13 shall comply with
the Contract and Conform. The Goods Warranty Period shall be extended in respect of such Goods
for a duration equivalent to the period during which the Goods were being replaced or reworked
or made unavailable or during which Customer’s operations were interrupted, whichever lasts
longer. Should any of such Goods be found not to Conform within such extended Goods Warranty
Period, then Clause 7.13 shall apply.
7.16 Should Supplier fail to diligently and satisfactorily carry out the replacement or rework of the Goods
as provided in Clauses 7.13 and 7.14, Customer has the right to have the replacement or rework
performed by a third party upon Customer’s prior notice to Supplier. The direct and documented
costs incurred by Customer in connection with the replacement or rework by such third party shall
be payable by Supplier. Rework or replacement by a third party under this Clause shall not relieve
Supplier from its warranty obligations under the Contract.
7.17 The warranties under this Clause 7 shall not apply to the extent that Supplier demonstrates that
replacement or rework of the Goods results from: (a) normal wear and tear; or (b) damage caused
by a third party, or by a Customer’s misuse unless such damage or misuse is due to acts, omissions,
faulty instructions or negligence of any member of Supplier’s Group.
8 SERVICES
8.1 This Clause 8 shall apply in respect of the provision of Services only.
Warranties in relation to Services
8.2 Supplier warrants that from the date of acceptance of any Services in accordance with the Contract
for a period of twenty-four (24) months (the “Services Warranty Period”), if any Service is required
to be re-performed, Supplier shall re-perform such Service at no additional cost to Customer.
Page 13 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
8.3 Should any of the Services be re-performed, the Services Warranty Period shall be extended for a
new period of twenty-four (24) months in respect of such re-performed Services from the date
when such re-performance was completed in accordance with the Contract.
8.4 Should Supplier fail to diligently perform or re-perform the Services, Customer has the right to have
such Services performed by a third-party subject to Customer’s prior notice to Supplier. The direct
and documented costs incurred by Customer in connection with the performance by such third
party shall be charged back to Supplier. Performance by a third party under this Clause shall not
relieve Supplier from its warranty obligations under the Contract.
9 ACCEPTANCE OF GOODS AND/OR SERVICES
9.1 Acceptance of Goods and/or Services shall occur when:
(a) Customer has inspected such Goods and/or Services to see whether the Goods and/or
Services Conform, and
(b) only once all elements of the Goods and/or Services as described in the Contract have
been provided to Customer.
9.2 Acceptance of Goods and/or Services shall take place in accordance with the following procedures:
Acceptance without reserves
(a) Acceptance without reserve shall occur when Customer confirms in writing that it
accepts the Goods without reserves.
Acceptance with reserve(s)
(b) Should Customer identify Goods and/or the Services that do not Conform, and decide
at its own discretion that such Goods and/or Services can be reworked, then Customer
has the right to either:
(i) accept such Goods and/or Services with reserve(s), in which case Supplier shall
carry out the rework necessary to remedy the reserves within the period given
by Customer. If at the end of this period, Supplier has not satisfactorily carried
out the rework (without prejudice to Customer’s right to terminate the Contract
in accordance with Clause 19), Customer may either: (a) upon Customer’s prior
notice, perform itself or cause a third party to perform, at Supplier’s costs and
risk; or (b) require Supplier not to remedy all or part of the reserves and to
provide a reduction in the price(s) payable for the relevant Goods and/or
Services; in any case, Customer shall be entitled to late performance damages
pursuant to Clause 14; or
(ii) refuse to accept the Goods and/or Services in accordance with Clause 9.2(c).
Refusal
(c) Customer may refuse the Goods and/or Services if Goods do not Conform and/or if the
Services are not performed in accordance with the Contract. In such case, Customer
may terminate the Contract in accordance with Clause 19.
(d) Acceptance of Goods and/or Services by Customer (with or without reserve(s)), or the
refusal to accept Goods and/or Services shall be recorded in a written document dated
and signed by both Parties.
Page 14 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
9.3 The Supplier shall remain fully responsible for any defects or for any non-Conformity whatsoever
which were not apparent at the time of Acceptance despite any inspection or acceptance by the
Customer and shall not reduce or otherwise affect Supplier's obligations and warranties under the
Contract.
10 SUPPLIER’S OBLIGATIONS
General
10.1 Supplier shall, and shall ensure that its Personnel, its Subcontractors and their Personnel shall
perform the Contract:
(a) in accordance with the time schedule set out in the Contract and, if not specified, then
promptly;
(b) in compliance with Good Industry Practices, any Applicable Laws, and Mandatory
Policies;
(c) by exercising all care, skill and diligence to prevent damage to Customer’s Site or
property; and
(d) as an independent contractor and neither Supplier nor any of its Subcontractors nor
any of their Personnel shall be deemed for any purpose to be Customer’s Personnel.
Duty to inform
10.2 Supplier shall ensure it is aware of:
(a) any foreseeable external factors and conditions (including but not limited to technical
conditions); and
(b) any risks connected with the Goods and/or Services, including but not limited any
hygiene, safety and environmental risk,
that may affect the performance of the Contract and shall inform Customer and provide any advice
mitigating such factors, conditions or risks regardless of Customer’s knowledge or expertise.
Careful examinations of Customer information
10.3 Supplier shall carry out a careful examination of information provided by or on behalf of Customer
for the provision of Goods and/or Services, including any updated versions of any Mandatory
Policies, and Supplier shall inform Customer of any anomalies or omissions.
Customer shall not be liable for the accuracy and completeness of such information.
Authorisations
10.4 Supplier warrants that it and its Subcontractors shall, in compliance with Applicable Laws, maintain
at their own costs during the Term all statutory registrations, approvals and authorisations granted
by public authorities or professional organisations required to perform its obligations under the
Contract (“Authorisations”). Customer has the right to request Supplier to provide evidence of
Authorisations prior to the commencement of any provision of Goods and/or Services. In the event,
any Authorisation becomes invalid for any reason whatsoever, Supplier shall immediately inform
Customer of the same and Customer shall be entitled to terminate the Contract in accordance with
Clause 19.
11 OTHER OBLIGATIONS
Page 15 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
11.1 Other obligations, if any, shall be addressed in the Specific Terms.
12 AUDITS AND ACCOUNTING
12.1 Subject to prior notice to Supplier, Customer shall be entitled, at any time, to conduct, or have
conducted by third party, audits at Supplier’s or its Subcontractors respective facilities to ensure
Supplier and/or its Subcontractors are in compliance with their obligations under the Contract
(“Audits”). Information obtained during any Audit shall not be used for any purpose other than such
Audit. Supplier shall provide Customer with all assistance necessary for conducting such Audits.
Customer has the right during any Audits to copy any records and accounts for verification of any
sum payable under the Contract.
12.2 Such Audit shall not reduce or otherwise affect: (i) Supplier’s obligations, liabilities and warranties
under the Contract, (ii) Supplier’s status of independent contractor as provided in Clause 10.1, and
(iii) Customer’s right to refuse any Goods and/or Services.
12.3 Supplier shall safely keep, and cause its Subcontractors to keep, in accordance with generally
accepted accounting practice, accurate detailed records and accounts relating to the Contract for
an accurate audit and verification of any reimbursable costs, for the duration of the Contract and
for a period of two (2) years from its termination or expiry.
13 PRICE, INVOICING AND PAYMENTS
Payment, price and taxes
13.1 In consideration for the provision of the Goods and/or Services, Customer shall pay Supplier the
prices as specified in SCHEDULE 3.3 or in the Order. Such prices are fully inclusive of all cost, firm
and non-revisable, and shall include all taxes other than VAT.
13.2 Supplier shall be solely responsible and liable for all taxes, imposts, levies, fees, stamps, customs
duties and dues of any kind which may be assessed or levied by whatsoever authorities on Supplier
(“Taxes”), its Affiliates, Subcontractors and Personnel in any country in connection with the
performance of the Contract, including any taxes which Customer may be obligated to withhold
from its payments to Supplier in accordance with Applicable Laws.
13.3 Supplier shall defend, indemnify and hold Customer and its Affiliates harmless from and against any
claim, demand, cause of action, proceedings, judgements, award (including reasonable legal fees,
costs and expenses and sums paid by way of settlement), liability, loss, expense, penalty, fine and
damages and the like arising from, relating to, or in connection with the performance, mis-
performance or non-performance of the Contract. In respect of Clause 13.2. Supplier represents
that, in setting its prices for the supply of Goods and/or Services under the Contract, it has taken
into account all Taxes for which it is liable in accordance with this Clause.
Invoicing
13.4 Supplier shall issue invoices to be sent to Customer’s address as specified in the Order Request and
in the currency specified in the Contract. Such invoices shall comply with SCHEDULE 3.3 and
SCHEDULE 3.5 , any other instruction of Customer and Applicable Laws.
13.5 Upon Customer’s request, Supplier shall set up an electronic invoicing system, using a platform
specified by Customer. Each Party shall enter into an agreement with such provider and each Party
shall bear their own costs for the use of such platform.
13.6 In addition to the requirements of Applicable Laws, invoices shall contain the following information:
Page 16 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
• Supplier’s EU VAT code if any;
• references or identification number of the Contract;
• the period for which the invoice relates;
• the amounts due by Customer;
• the basis on which the amounts due have been calculated;
• the description and quantity of all Goods and/or Services provided;
• the nomenclature, the net weight in kilograms, the transportation mode and the
country of origin of the Goods;
• if necessary, copies of documentation in support of the amounts invoiced; and
• the relevant Order reference number.
13.7 Customer shall pay non-disputed invoices by means of electronic transfer of funds (or other agreed
method) within thirty (30) days from the last day of the month in which the invoice was issued.
13.8 Any undisputed invoice due and payable by Customer shall bear interest thereon from the due date
of such invoice, calculated:
(a) for invoices governed by the mandatory French laws on payment term, at the rate
equal to three times the French legal interest rate in effect in France; or
(b) for any other invoices, at the average rate (for the period of delayed payment) of the
three (3) months European Inter Bank Offered Rate (as published by the Banque de
France) or its substitute as may be agreed by the Parties, plus one percent (1%).
Disputed invoices
13.9 In the event Customer disputes all or part of an invoice, Customer shall send a notice to Supplier
specifying the reasons for its refusal to pay. Customer shall have no obligation to pay any disputed
amount until such dispute is resolved between the Parties; in that case, Supplier shall correct the
invoice and submit it to Customer for payment in accordance with this Clause 13.
Set-offs
13.10 Customer shall have the right at its sole discretion to offset amounts owed by Supplier against
amounts payable by Customer under the Contract.
14 LATE PERFORMANCE OR MISPERFORMANCE
14.1 Should Supplier fail to deliver the Goods and/or Services by the Delivery Date or fail to provide
Goods and/or Services that Conform, Supplier shall pay upon notice the amounts set out in
SCHEDULE 3.3 (or otherwise in the Contract).
14.2 Payment of such amounts shall be without prejudice to the other rights and remedies of Customer
under the Contract or at law.
15 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
Specific Elements
15.1 In consideration for Customer's payment of the price specified in the Contract, Supplier shall assign
to Customer, and warrants the assignment by its Personnel, its Subcontractors and their Personnel
of, all intellectual property rights relating to any specific elements provided to comply with
Customer’s specifications, including but not limited to plans, studies, models, designs and drawings,
user guides, technical documentation, manuals, and documents (“Specific Elements”).
Page 17 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
15.2 The assignment as provided in Clause 15.1 shall occur when such Specific Elements are created and
shall be exclusive, world-wide, perpetual, royalty-free, transferable, and shall include all rights to
exploit such Specific Elements: the rights of reproduction, representation, translation, adaptation
and sale, on all media and for all forms of use and exploitation. (If Master Contract is governed by
French law, delete <<perpetual>> and insert the following) These rights will be granted for the full
term of protection of intellectual property rights.
Standard elements
15.3 In case the Goods and/or Services contain standard elements, which are not developed specifically
for Customer or any of its Affiliates, protected by intellectual property rights (including but not
limited to standard plans, manuals, documents and software), delivered to Customer by Supplier,
in consideration for the remuneration included in the price specified in the Contract, Supplier grants
Customer, any of its Affiliates that may be beneficiaries of the Contract and third parties acting on
behalf of Customer, a personal and non-exclusive, royalty-free, worldwide, perpetual, transferable
right to use, reproduce, represent, translate, repair and adapt such standard elements for the needs
of Customer and any of its Affiliates. (If Master Contract is governed by French law, delete
<<perpetual>> and insert the following) These rights shall be granted for the entire duration of the
intellectual property rights protection and for all media.
15.4 In case of transfer by Customer to a third party of any equipment or any material or asset, which
embodies or uses a standard element, the above Customer’s right to use shall be transferred to
such third party at no additional cost.
Infringement of intellectual property rights
15.5 Supplier warrants that it and its Subcontractors, is either the owner of all intellectual property rights
relating to any delivered elements or that it has been granted all necessary licences from third
parties owning these intellectual property rights, to enable Customer to freely use and exploit such
elements in accordance with the provisions of this Clause 15. Supplier shall and shall ensure that its
Personnel and Subcontractors shall not infringe or cause Customer to infringe any third party’s
intellectual property rights. This warranty shall not apply if Supplier can demonstrate that the
infringement alleged is attributable to Customer.
15.6 Supplier shall indemnify and hold Customer harmless from and against any and all claims, costs,
damages, expenses or legal action by third parties arising out of or in connection with any
infringement or any other breach of their intellectual property rights.
15.7 In the event of a risk of a claim or legal action, Supplier shall take all steps necessary to ensure that
the risk of infringement is eliminated, shall inform Customer thereof and shall take into account
Customer’s business constraints.
15.8 In case an allegation is made that Customer may not use an element which forms part of any Goods
and/or Services without infringing a third party’s intellectual property right, Supplier shall, at its
own cost and at the sole option of Customer, either replace the element in respect of which such
allegation is made, or modify such element so that the infringement or any other breach no longer
exists, in compliance with the specifications applicable to such element. Such replacements or
modifications shall be performed within periods compatible with Customer’s needs. Should
Supplier fail to make such replacements or modifications, Supplier shall reimburse Customer for
the price of such Goods and/or Services.
15.9 The above provisions do not affect the Customer's right to claim damages from the Supplier and/or
terminate the Contract in accordance with the provisions of Clause 19.
Page 18 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
16 CONFIDENTIALITY
16.1 All information supplied by Customer to Supplier in connection with the Contract shall be kept
confidential (unless and until released by Customer) and Supplier shall not disclose such
information to anybody except as provided in this Clause. This Clause 16.1 shall not apply to
information which, as evidenced by Supplier:
(a) is already in the public domain at the time of disclosure; or
(b) is required to be disclosed under Applicable Laws (provided Supplier shall give notice
to Customer prior to such disclosure).
16.2 Supplier shall limit access to such information and data to those of its Personnel reasonably
requiring the same for the performance of the Contract and that Supplier shall not use any of such
information and data in any way other than for the aforesaid purpose. Supplier shall ensure that its
Personnel and Subcontractors are bound by confidentiality undertakings equivalent to those
contained in this Clause 16.
16.3 Supplier shall neither refer to nor use Customer’s business name or trademarks for any reason
whatsoever, without the prior, explicit and written authorisation of Customer.
16.4 Any failure to comply with the provisions of this Clause 16 shall be considered a material breach by
Supplier, and may cause immediate damages to Customer and Customer shall therefore be entitled
to take any necessary legal steps, including the remedies of injunction, specific performance and
other equitable relief for any breach or threatened breach of this Clause (and any such remedy shall
not be deemed to be the exclusive remedy for such breach or threatened breach). Supplier shall
defend, indemnify and hold harmless Customer and any of its Affiliates from and against any and
all claims suffered or incurred in respect of the above confidentiality obligations.
16.5 Supplier shall be liable for any disclosure of such information and data howsoever arising by any of
Supplier Group’s Personnel.
16.6 The provision of this Clause 16 shall apply mutatis mutandis to any information supplied by
Customer Signatory to Supplier Signatory in connection with the Master Contract.
17 LIABILITY AND INDEMNITIES
17.1 Subject to any Liability provisions contained in the Part 4 - Specific Terms (if any), each Party shall:
(a) be liable for any damage (including any injuries, death, damage to or loss of property)
that (i) it, its Personnel, and with respect to Supplier any Subcontractors cause to the
other Party or to a third party and/or (ii) is arising out of or in connection with the
performance, misperformance or non-performance of the Contract (whether caused
by negligence, breach of statutory duty, tort, wilful misconduct or other fault); and
(b) defend, indemnify and hold harmless the other Party and its insurers from and against
any damage, cost and/or liability that the other Party may suffer in this respect.
18 INSURANCE
18.1 Supplier shall take out and maintain in force and shall procure that any Subcontractor takes out and
maintains in force and effect with reputable insurers such insurance policies as may be necessary
in accordance with Good Industry Practice to insure Supplier against all manner of risks that might
arise out of the acts or omissions of Supplier or otherwise in connection Supplier’s performance of
its obligations under the Contract, including those insurances detailed further in SCHEDULE 3.8 , at
their own expenses throughout the Term.
Page 19 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
18.2 The insurance amounts indicated in SCHEDULE 3.8 are minimum requirements and not limits of
liability. They should not be construed as Customer's consent to limit Supplier's financial liability in
excess of the amounts specified in SCHEDULE 3.8 .
18.3 Prior to providing any Goods and/or Services and at each insurance policy’s renewal required
throughout the duration of the Contract, Supplier shall provide Customer with the certificate(s)
issued by its insurer or by its insurance broker certifying the existence of the insurance policies
required in accordance with the Contract, the insured amounts, the type of coverage and the period
of cover of the policy or policies.
18.4 Supplier’s insurances shall contain provisions whereby the insurers waive their rights of subrogation
against Customer and any of its’ Affiliates and their respective insurers to the extent of the liabilities
and indemnities assumed by Supplier under the Contract.
18.5 Supplier shall:
(a) not by its acts or omissions cause any insurance cover or policy to become void or
voidable; and
(b) immediately notify Customer of any cancellation notice received from any insurer or
of any material change in cover type or amount of insurance.
19 TERMINATION
Termination due to Supplier’s default
19.1 Upon prior notice to Supplier Signatory, Customer Signatory shall have the right to terminate the
Master Contract without indemnity or liability of any nature to Supplier Signatory in the following
cases:
(a) material breach of the Contract by Supplier Signatory;
(b) a series of breaches of the provisions of this Master Contract by Supplier Signatory,
which when taken together amount to a material breach;
(c) the Supplier Signatory has suffered any event or circumstance set out in Clause 19.3(a);
(d) incapacity or prohibition or cessation of operations of Supplier Signatory for any
reason whatsoever;
(e) non-compliance with the provisions of any Applicable Laws by Supplier Signatory; and
(f) failure to comply with any of the Mandatory Policies.
19.2 Upon prior notice to Supplier, Customer shall be entitled to terminate an Order without indemnity
or liability of any nature to Supplier in the following cases:
(a) material breach of the Contract by Supplier;
(b) a series of breaches of the provisions of the Contract by Supplier, which when taken
together amount to a material breach;
(c) if Customer becomes aware, that Supplier will be unable to provide the Goods and/or
Services by the date agreed in the relevant Order;
(d) total or partial non-completion of the obligations incumbent on Supplier under the
Contract after notification to Supplier of the breach and requesting him to remedy the
default within a reasonable time limit set by Customer,
Page 20 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
(e) the Master Contract has been terminated by Customer Signatory for any of the reasons
in Clause 19.1;
(f) Supplier has suffered any event or circumstance set out in Clause 19.4(a);
(g) incapacity or prohibition or cessation of operations of Supplier for any reason
whatsoever;
(h) non-compliance with the provisions of any Applicable Laws by Supplier; and
(i) failure to comply with any of the Mandatory Policies.
19.3 In case of termination of the Contract in accordance with Clause 19.1 or 19.2:
(a) Customer shall only be liable to pay Supplier, as full and final compensation under the
Contract or otherwise, the amount due for Goods delivered and Conform and/or
Services performed by Supplier and Conform and accepted by Customer prior to the
date of termination, in compliance with the Contract; and
(b) Customer may have performed all or part of the outstanding obligations under the
Contract by another supplier and to invoice Supplier for the difference in price
between (i) the cost incurred by Customer; and (ii) the cost Customer would have
incurred if Supplier had fully performed the Contract, and Customer shall be entitled
to all direct and documented costs and damage (including additional managerial
expenses and administrative services) suffered by Customer in connection with such
termination; and
(c) any monies due to Customer pursuant to this Clause 19.3 shall be paid to Customer
within thirty (30) days from the last day of the month in which the invoice was issued,
failing which such amounts outstanding shall accrue interest at the rate in Clause 13.8
from the due date of such invoice until the date that such outstanding amounts are
paid in full.
Termination due to Change of Control or insolvency of Supplier
19.4 Without prejudice to any other rights under the Contract, Customer may terminate the Contract at
any time by serving notice:
(a) unless contrary to any statutory provision of public order, if Supplier is the subject of
any of the following events or circumstances: (i) it is unable to pay its debts as they fall
due or admits inability to pay its debts; (ii) it stops or suspends, or threatens to stop or
suspend, making payments with respect to all or any class of its debts or it suspends
or ceases, or threatens to suspend or cease, carrying on all or a substantial part of its
business; (iii) it makes a proposal for or enters into any compromise or arrangement
with its creditors other than for the sole purpose of a scheme for a solvent
amalgamation with one or more other companies or a solvent reconstruction; (iv) a
petition is filed, a notice is given, a resolution is passed, or an order is made, for or in
connection with its winding up other than for the sole purpose of a scheme for a
solvent amalgamation with one or more other companies or a solvent reconstruction;
(v) an application is made to court, or an order is made, for the appointment of an
administrator, or if a notice of intention to appoint an administrator is given or if an
administrator is appointed, over it; (vi) a person becomes entitled to appoint a receiver
over its assets or a receiver is appointed over its assets; or (vii) any event occurs, or
Page 21 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
proceeding is taken, with respect to it in any jurisdiction to which it is subject that has
an effect equivalent or similar to any of the events mentioned in (i) to (vii) (inclusive).
(b) if Supplier undergoes a Change of Control.
19.5 If Customer terminates the Contract in accordance with Clause 19.4, Customer shall pay Supplier
the amount due for Goods delivered to Customer and/or for Services performed by Supplier prior
to the date of termination. Such payment shall constitute the full and final compensation payable
by Customer under the Contract and Supplier shall have no claim against Customer for such
termination.
Termination at Customer’s convenience
19.6 Without prejudice to the other provisions of the Contract, Customer may at its discretion terminate
the Contract at any time by serving notice but shall in such case:
(a) pay Supplier the amount due for Goods delivered to and/or for Services performed by
Supplier and accepted by Customer prior to the date of termination;
(b) reimburse Supplier for all costs reasonably and irrevocably incurred and paid or
committed in good faith as evidenced by supporting documents in respect of the
Goods or Services ordered but not delivered or performed (as applicable) on such
termination;
(c) pay Supplier five per cent (5%) of the difference between (i) the price Supplier would
have received for full performance of the Contract, including any outstanding or
partially performed Order, and (ii) the aggregate of the amounts already paid to
Supplier in accordance with Clause 19.6(a) and (b).
19.7 Such payments in accordance with Clause 19.6 shall constitute the full and final compensation
payable by Customer to Supplier under the Contract and Supplier shall have no claim against
Customer for such termination.
Termination for prolonged Force Majeure event
19.8 Without prejudice to any other provisions of the Contract, Customer may terminate the Contract
at any time by serving notice if an event of Force Majeure continues for more than thirty (30) days.
19.9 If Customer terminates the Contract in accordance with Clause 19.8, Customer shall (a) pay Supplier
the amount due for Goods delivered to and/or for Services performed by Supplier and accepted by
Customer prior to the date of termination; and (b) reimburse Supplier for all costs reasonably and
irrevocably incurred and paid or committed in good faith as evidenced by supporting documents in
respect of the Goods or Services ordered but not delivered or performed (as applicable) on such
termination.
19.10 Such payments in accordance with Clause 19.9 shall constitute the full and final compensation
payable by Customer to Supplier under the Contract and Supplier shall have no claim against
Customer for such termination.
20 FORCE MAJEURE
20.1 None of the Parties shall be deemed to be in breach of its contractual obligations for any delay in
performance of, or for any failure to perform, any obligation, in whole or in part, under the Contract
to the extent that this delay, non-performance or failure results from or is due to Force Majeure.
Force Majeure shall only relieve the affected Party from its obligations under the Contract to the
Page 22 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
extent and for such period as the said Party is prevented or delayed from performing its obligations.
Each Party shall bear all its own expenses resulting from the occurrence of Force Majeure.
20.2 The affected Party shall immediately notify the other Party in writing. Such notice shall include: (a)
details of the occurrence and nature of the relevant act, event or circumstance claimed by it to
constitute Force Majeure; and (b) an estimate of the duration such act, event or circumstance is
likely to persist in respect of its obligations affected (if possible).
20.3 Any Party whose obligations have been suspended under the foregoing provisions of this Clause 20
shall: (a) notify the other Party as soon as practicable after the Force Majeure event has ceased; (b)
resume performance of its obligations under the Contract as soon as reasonably practicable; (c) use
reasonable endeavours to remedy the situation as quickly as possible; and (d) notify the other Party
when such resumption is expected to occur and when it does occur.
21 ASSIGNMENT
21.1 No member of the Supplier Group shall assign, novate or otherwise transfer its rights and
obligations under a Contract to any third party, in whole or in part, without the prior written
consent of the relevant Customer. The assigning party shall remain jointly and severally liable with
its assignee towards the relevant Customer for the full performance of the relevant Contract.
21.2 Customer shall be entitled to assign, novate or otherwise transfer its rights and obligations under
the Contract to any of its’ Affiliates, upon notice to Supplier.
21.3 In the event of a Change of Control of Supplier, Supplier shall promptly notify Customer thereof.
22 SUBCONTRACTING
22.1 Except as provided in this Clause 22, Supplier shall not subcontract any of its obligations under the
Contract.
22.2 Should Supplier wish to subcontract part of its obligations under the Contract, it shall send a prior
written request to Customer specifying:
(a) any details regarding the proposed Subcontractor including any relevant qualifications;
and
(b) the obligations under the Contract that Supplier wishes to subcontract.
22.3 Supplier shall prohibit its own Subcontractors from subcontracting any obligations under the
Contract, except as approved by the Customer.
22.4 Supplier shall be responsible for the performance of its Subcontractors in accordance with the
Contract. Supplier shall defend, save, indemnify and hold Customer harmless from and against any
consequences arising from Subcontractors’ non-compliance with the requirements of the Contract
and any claim made by its Subcontractors, their suppliers or their respective Personnel.
23 TOTALENERGIES PRODUCTS
As far as legally permissible, Supplier shall, in the performance of the Contract, procure and use,
and require that its Subcontractors procure and use, products and services marketed by Customer
or any of its Affiliates, including marine, road and aviation fuels, base oils, drilling fluids and well
services, solvents, natural gas and electricity, greases, lubricants, additives, polymers, chemicals,
seals and valve components, battery systems and photovoltaic systems, subject to availability and
provided that prices are competitive. If Supplier cannot procure, use or specify the use of such
products, Supplier shall so inform Customer and justify its reasons.
Page 23 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
24 GENERAL PROVISIONS
24.1 Notices and delivery
(a) Any notices given under the Contract shall be in writing and in English, delivered by
hand, by registered letter with acknowledgement of receipt, by courier using an
internationally recognised courier company if sent abroad, or by electronic mail with
proof of receipt, to the postal address or electronic address, specified in PART 1 – Form
of Agreement of the Contract or elsewhere in the Contract. A Party may change its
postal address, electronic address and/or details by prior notice to the other Party in
accordance with this Clause 24.1.
(b) A notice shall be treated as having been received:
(i) at the time of delivery, if delivered by hand, by registered letter with
acknowledgement of receipt or courier;
(ii) at the time of receipt by the sender of a proof of receipt by the addressee, if
transmitted by electronic mail.
24.2 Severability
If any provision of the Contract is deemed invalid by a court or any other competent authority for
any reason, such invalidity shall not affect the validity or operation of the other provision of the
Contract except only so far as shall be necessary to give effect to the construction of such invalidity
and any such invalid provision shall be deemed severed from the Contract without affecting the
validity or the balance of the Contract.
24.3 Waivers
The failure on the part of either Party to enforce, from time to time, all or any portion of the terms
and conditions of the Contract shall not constitute a waiver of such terms or conditions.
24.4 Entire agreement
The Contract constitutes the entire agreement between the Parties, and supersedes all prior oral
and written negotiations, understandings, representations and/or agreements with respect to the
Contract made between the Parties prior to the Effective Date.
24.5 Cumulative rights
The rights and remedies of the Parties shall not be limited to those set out in the Contract, and such
rights and remedies shall be cumulative, and are not exclusive of any other rights or remedies
provided by the Contract, law, equity or otherwise, provided however that the Contract shall always
take precedence over any Applicable Laws with which it conflicts, or which are expressly excluded
by the Contract as far as legally permissible. Except as expressly stated in the Contract (or in law or
equity), in the case of rights and remedies provided by law or equity, any right or remedy may be
exercised wholly or partially from time to time.
24.6 Liens
The Supplier shall not create or do anything (including by act, omission or negligence) which would
result in the creation of any lien or charge on the Customer’s Site, property and equipment and/or
the Goods or any part thereof. The Supplier hereby represents that it has not created any such lien
or done anything as above before entering into the Contract.
Page 24 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
The Supplier shall defend, indemnify and hold the Customer harmless from and against any lien
with respect to Custome’s Site, property and equipment and/or the Goods or any part thereof, if
directly created or caused by act, omission or negligence of the Supplier’s Group.
24.7 Amendments
No modification of the Contract shall be effective unless set out in a written amendment duly signed
by authorised representatives of the Parties.
24.8 Surviving clauses
(a) Termination or expiry of the Contract for any reason shall not affect any rights or
liabilities that may have accrued prior to such termination or expiry.
(b) Without prejudice to the generality of Clause 24.8(a), any provision of the Contract
which is intended to apply after termination of the Contract shall survive the
termination of the Contract for whatever reason and shall continue notwithstanding
such termination and thereafter remain in full force and effect.
24.9 Further assurance
Supplier shall at its own cost do and/or execute or arrange for the doing and/or execution of, any
act and/or document reasonably requested of it by Customer to implement and give full effect to
the terms of the Contract.
24.10 Counterparts
The Contract may be entered into in any number of counterparts and by the Parties on separate
counterparts, all of which taken together shall constitute one and the same instrument.
24.11 Relationship of Parties
The Contract has been concluded between independent Parties. No provisions of the Contract shall
be interpreted as giving the right or mandate to either Party to act on behalf of the other Party and
does not authorise any Party to bind any other Party nor as implying any association, agency,
partnership, relationship of principal and agent or society between them, or as creating a joint and
several liability between them.
25 THIRD PARTY RIGHTS
25.1 This Clause applies where the Contract is governed by English law.
25.2 Each of Customer’s Affiliates (as applicable) shall have the benefit of all rights, benefits and
limitations provided for in the Contract and accordingly shall be entitled to enforce and rely on the
Contract as if it were a Party.
25.3 Notwithstanding Clause 25.2, Customer and Supplier (or in the case of the Master Contract,
Customer Signatory and Supplier Signatory) may agree to rescind or vary the Contract without the
consent of any other person or entity.
25.4 Except as provided in Clause 25.2 and the Specific Terms, the Contract is intended to be solely for
the benefit of the Parties and is not intended to confer any benefits upon, or to create any rights in
favour of, any person other than the Parties.
26 GOVERNING LAW AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION
Page 25 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
26.1 The interpretation, existence and validity of the Contract shall be subject to the laws (Select the
applicable governing law and delete the non-selected ones) [England and
Wales][France][Belgium].
26.2 Except as specified in the Contract, the Parties agree to submit any dispute to the exclusive
jurisdiction of the (Select the applicable jurisdiction and delete the non-selected ones) [courts of
England and Wales][Paris Commercial Courts, France][Commercial Courts of Brussels, Belgium]2.
26.3 Notwithstanding Clause 26.1 and 26.2, if Customer and Supplier to Local Implementation Contract
wish to specify a different governing law and dispute resolution mechanism to the Master Contract,
Customer and Supplier shall, in the Local Implementation Contract, make any necessary
amendments to these GTs.
26.4 The Parties expressly waive the application of the United Nations Convention on contracts for the
international sale of goods (CISG).
27 ECONOMIC SANCTIONS AND EXPORT CONTROL
27.1 Supplier represents and warrants that, as of the Effective Date :
(a) no Sanctions Laws / Regulations hinder or prevent Supplier Group from executing the
Contract;
(b) None of Supplier, its Affiliates (to the extent they are involved in the execution of the
Contract), its Subcontractors and its and their shareholders and directors is a Restricted Person,
and
(c) Supplier possesses or will possess the authorizations and licenses required to import and/or
export Supplier’s equipment or any other goods, equipment and technology used or supplied for
the execution of the Contract in compliance with Sanctions Laws/ Regulations.
27.2 Notwithstanding any other provision in the Contract, in no event shall either Party be obligated
to perform any of its obligations under the Contract, including payment, that would result in a
breach, or violation of Sanctions Laws/ Regulations, or subject a Party or any of its Affiliates to
punitive measures thereunder (a “Sanctioned Obligation”).
27.3 If a Sanctions Laws/ Regulations constitutes Force Majeure:
(a) the Party whose performance is so affected (“Affected Party”) shall as soon as reasonably
practicable issue the notice required as set forth in Article 20, which notice shall contain the
following minimum information: (i) an identification of the Sanctions Laws/ Regulations that is
considered to constitute Force Majeure, and description of the relevant Sanctioned Obligation (ii)
the extent to which the Affected Party is prevented from performing the Contract, and
(b) either Party may:
(i) suspend the Sanctioned Obligation or
(ii) terminate the Contract
as set forth in Article 20 or in Articles 19.8, 19.9 and 19.10.
2 The dispute should be submitted to the Paris Commercial Courts if the Contract is subject to French law, to the Commercial
Courts of Brussels if subject to the laws of Belgium and to the Courts of England if the Contract is subject to the laws of
England and Wales.
Page 26 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
(c) In the event of a partial suspension as set forth in this Article 27.3.b (i), the Affected Party shall
continue to perform its obligations under the Contract to the extent that they are not Sanctioned
Obligations.
27.4 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Contract, should Supplier be in breach of
Sanctions Laws/ Regulations or otherwise unable to perform its obligations under the Contract
due to a Sanctioned Obligation that does not amount to Force Majeure, then Customer shall have
the right to terminate the Contract forthwith by giving written notice to the Supplier. Such
termination shall be effective from the date of receipt of the notice and the consequences of such
termination shall be those set forth in Articles 19.1, 19.2 and 19.3.
27.5 Either Party may request from the other Party any information required by a Sanctions Authority,
in which case such Party shall duly comply with such request unless such information is covered
by privilege, or confidentiality.
27.6 Supplier shall perform and update due diligences on its Subcontractors using reputable screening
tools such as World-Check to ensure compliance with Sanctions Laws/ Regulations and Customer
reserves the right to request proof of and/or documentation relating to such due diligences.
27.7 Supplier shall promptly notify Customer if any member of the Supplier Group or any of its or their
shareholders or directors become a Restricted Person.
Page 27 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
SCHEDULE 3.1 – GOODS LIST
Page 28 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
SCHEDULE 3.2 – SERVICES LIST
Page 29 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
SCHEDULE 3.3 – FINANCIAL TERMS AND AMOUNTS FOR LATE PERFORMANCE
Page 30 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
SCHEDULE 3.4 – PREVENTION OF ILLEGAL EMPLOYMENT POLICY
Supplier registered in France
1 Supplier garantit, dans le cadre du présent Contrat, la régularité de sa situation au regard de la
législation sociale. A ce titre, Supplier certifie avoir procédé aux déclarations exigées par les
organismes de protection sociale et avoir rempli les obligations indiquées aux articles L.8221-3 et
L.8221-5 du Code du Travail.
2 Supplier s’engage à remettre à la signature du Contrat puis tous les six mois à compter de cette
date, les documents mentionnés ci-dessous, conformément aux articles D.8222-5, D.8222-7 et
D.8222-8 et aux articles D.8254-2 et suivants du Code du travail:
3 Dans tous les cas
3.1 Une attestation de fourniture de déclarations sociales et de paiement des cotisations et
contributions de sécurité sociale prévue à l’article L. 243-15 du Code de la sécurité sociale émanant
de l’organisme de protection sociale chargé du recouvrement des cotisations et des contributions
sociales incombant au Supplier datant de moins de six mois, et
3.2 Cette attestation devra permettre la vérification de son authenticité auprès dudit organisme, au
moyen du dispositif d’authentification prévu à l’article D. 243-15 du Code de la sécurité sociale.
4 Lorsque l’immatriculation au répertoire des métiers ou au registre du commerce et des sociétés
est obligatoire
4.1 Un original de l’extrait de l’inscription au registre du commerce et des sociétés (K ou K bis) datant
de moins de trois mois, ou
4.2 Une copie de la carte d’identification justifiant l’inscription au répertoire des métiers, ou
4.3 Un devis, document publicitaire ou correspondance professionnelle mentionnant le nom ou la
dénomination sociale, l’adresse complète et le numéro d’immatriculation au registre du commerce
et des sociétés ou au répertoire des métiers ou à une liste ou un tableau d’un ordre professionnel
ou la référence à l’agrément délivré par l’autorité compétente, ou
4.4 Un récépissé du dépôt de déclaration auprès du Centre des Formalités des Entreprises pour les
personnes en cours d’inscription.
5 Lorsque le Supplier emploie des salariés étrangers et soumis à l’autorisation de travail
mentionnée à l’article L.5221-2 du Code du travail
5.1 Une liste nominative des salariés étrangers et soumis à l’autorisation de travail mentionnée à
l’article L.5221-2 du Code du travail, cette liste mentionnant, pour chaque salarié, sa date
d’embauche, sa nationalité ainsi que le type et le numéro d’ordre du titre valant autorisation de
travail.
Supplier not registered in France
6 Supplier shall produce the documents and attestation listed below at the signature of Contract.
Whenever whole or part of the Services are to be performed in France, Supplier shall reiterate the
provision of said documents and attestation every six (6) months until the end of the Term.
7 These documents and certificates should be written in the French language or sent along with a
translation into French.
Page 31 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
8 In all cases:
8.1 a document quoting its individual identification number or, if Supplier is not held to have such a
number, a document stating its identity and address or, as the case may be, the details of its tax
representative in the country of operations; and
8.2 should it be required by the legislation of the state where Supplier has its registered address, a
document established by the body in charge of monitoring the compulsory social/labour scheme
relevant to Supplier and certifying that Supplier has performed the mandatory social declarations
and the payment of its associated contributions, and
8.3 Whenever whole or part of the Services are to be performed in France:
(a) a document testifying to Supplier’s regular social/labour status with respect to
regulation (CE) n°883/2004 as of 29th April 2004 or to an international social/labour
security convention, or
(b) a certificate of social declaration and payment of social contributions and taxes as
provided for by article L. 243-15 of the French Social Security Code. In such a case, this
certificate shall be in a way to allow the verification of its authenticity through the
authentication system provided for by article D. 243-15 of the French Social Security
Code.
9 When Supplier’s registration with a trade registry is mandatory in the country of operation or
domiciliation:
9.1 a document issued by the authorities in charge of keeping said trade registry or a document
testifying to such registration; or
9.2 a bill of quantities, advertising document or trade correspondence, mentioning the name or
corporate title, full address and nature of registration to the trade registry; or
9.3 for companies in the process of incorporation, a document less than six (6) months old from the
organisation entitled to receive registration to the trade registry and testifying to the registration
application for said registry.
10 When Supplier seconds on the French national territory foreign employees subject to the work
authorisation provided under article L.5221-2 of the French Labour Code as part of performance
of Contract:
10.1 a name list of the foreign employees subject to the work authorisation provided under article
L.5221-2 of the French Labour Code, should mention, for each single employee, their hiring date,
nationality as well as the type and order number of work authorisation document.
Page 32 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
SCHEDULE 3.5 – ANTI-CORRUPTION POLICY
11 DEFINITIONS
CLOSE FAMILY MEMBER OF A PUBLIC OFFICIAL means a husband/spouse or partner, one of their children,
siblings or parents; the husband/spouse or partner of their children or siblings; or any household member.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL means an elected or appointed official, employee or agent of any national, regional or
local government/state or department, agency or instrumentality of any such government/state or any
enterprise in which such a government/state owns, directly or indirectly, a majority or controlling interest;
an official of a political party; a candidate for public office; and any official, employee or agent of any
public international organization.
12 PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION
12.1 In recognition of the principles enshrined in the pertinent international and regional conventions
on combating corruption and to ensure compliance with the anti-corruption laws applicable to the
activities under the Contract and any other anti-corruption laws otherwise applicable to the Parties
or their ultimate parent company,
12.2 Supplier, in respect of the Contract and the matters that are the subject of the Contract, warrants
that neither it nor to its knowledge anyone on its behalf, has made or offered nor will make or offer
any payment, gift, or promise or give any advantage, whether directly or through an intermediary,
to or for the use of any Public Official, where such payment, gift, promise or advantage would be
for purposes of:
(a) influencing any act or decision of such Public Official;
(b) inducing such Public Official to do or omit to do any act in violation of their lawful
duties;
(c) securing any improper advantage; or
(d) inducing such Public Official to use their influence to affect any act or decision of any
department, agency or instrumentality of any government or public enterprise.
12.3 Supplier, in respect of the Contract and the matters that are the subject of the Contract, warrants
that it has not made or offered and will not make or offer any payment, gift, or promise or give any
advantage, whether directly or through intermediaries, to or for the use of any person (other than
a Public Official) insofar as such payment, gift, promise or advantage would be for purposes of
inducing such person to do or omit to do any act in violation of their lawful duty or to secure any
improper advantage, or otherwise to do or refrain from doing something that would violate the
laws applicable to the activities under the Contract.
12.4 Supplier shall cause Supplier’s Personnel and Subcontractors to comply with the obligations set
forth in this Attachment and to warrant the same under the terms of their agreements with any
Subcontractors. In particular, Supplier shall perform compliance due diligences on all major
Subcontractors in order to ensure that they shall act in strict compliance with the anti-corruption
laws applicable, conducting appropriate investigations. Customer reserves the right to request
proof of and/or documentation relating to such due diligences.
12.5 All financial settlements, billings and reports rendered to Customer shall accurately and in
reasonable detail reflect all activities and transactions undertaken in the performance of the
Contract. Supplier also shall maintain adequate internal controls to ensure that all payments made
Page 33 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
in performance of the Contract are authorized and in compliance with the Contract. Customer
reserves the right to perform itself or through a duly authorized representative, pursuant to Clause
12, audits at Supplier’s premises of all payments made by or on behalf of Supplier for Goods
provided and Services performed under the Contract. Supplier shall to cooperate fully in any such
audit, including by making the relevant books and records available to Customer or its duly
authorized representative and by answering any relevant questions that Customer may have
relating to Supplier’s performance under the Contract.
12.6 All payments by Customer to Supplier shall be made in accordance with the terms of payment
specified in Clause 13 of the Contract. The payment indications notified by the Supplier, which
TotalEnergies requires to be supported by a typical type of bank certificate or adequate letter of
comfort by the bank shall be deemed to constitute a representation and warranty by Supplier that
the bank account so notified is owned solely by Supplier and that no person other than Supplier has
any ownership of or interest in such account.
12.7 Supplier represents and warrants that no Public Official or Close Family Member of a Public Official
owns or possesses, directly or indirectly, shares or any other beneficial interest in Supplier (other
than through ownership of publicly traded securities that is not sufficient to constitute a controlling
interest), or is a director, officer or agent of Supplier, except for any ownership, interest or position
that Supplier has disclosed to Customer in writing. The foregoing representation and warranty will
continue so long as the Contract remains in effect. Supplier shall to notify Customer promptly and
in writing of any developments that would or might affect the accuracy of the foregoing
representation or warranty. In any case, if a Public Official or Close Family Member of a Public
Official owns or acquires, directly or indirectly, shares or any other beneficial interest in Supplier,
or is or becomes a director, officer or agent of Supplier, Supplier shall take appropriate steps to
ensure that such Public Official or Close Family Member of a Public Official avoids any conflict of
interest, complies with the legislation applicable in accordance with the place of performance of
the Contract prohibiting conflicts of interest on the part of Public Officials and complies with the
anti-corruption provisions described in this Attachment.
12.8 Notwithstanding the above, the Parties accept and acknowledge that, in the event any Supplier or
Subcontractor is owned in part by a State owned company or may, whether now or in the future,
be considered as a governmental entity or quasi-governmental entity at law, it is possible that a
Public Official may serve as a director, officer or employee of such Supplier or Subcontractor or its
subsidiaries. In such event, the Parties agree that, Supplier or such Subcontractor may have one or
more directors, officers or employees who qualify as Public Officials, provided that:
(a) the Public Official is occupying such position within Supplier or Subcontractor fully in
accordance with laws that are attributable to such Party and as may be required there-
under;
(b) the Public Official’s appointment as a director, officer or employee of Supplier or
Subcontractor is reviewed and approved by the State owned company;
(c) any payment to or on behalf of the Public Official is reviewed and approved by the
State owned company and does not exceed the remuneration that would be
reasonable for a person serving in that particular position within Supplier or
Subcontractor; and
(d) such remuneration is fully consistent with Applicable Laws and the matters that are
the subject of the Contract and is not made to influence any official act, decision or
Page 34 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
omission of such Public Official or reward the Public Official in respect of any of the
same that may have been taken in the past.
12.9 Without prejudice to any other rights or remedies, Customer otherwise may have hereunder or at
law, including but not limited to damages for breach of the Contract, if any of the undertakings or
requirements of this Attachment have not been complied with or fulfilled by Supplier in any
material respect, Customer shall have the right:
(a) to suspend payment and/or require reimbursement of any advance payment made
under the Contract, and/or
(b) to suspend and/or terminate the Contract for Supplier’s default with immediate effect
pursuant to Clause 19.
Page 35 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
SCHEDULE 3.6 – FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF PURCHASING (FPP)
TotalEnergies integrates all aspects of sustainability at the heart of its strategy, projects and operations,
and aims to be a reference with regard to commitments to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG). Our
Fundamental Principles of Purchasing, derived from our Code of Conduct, are the cornerstone of the long-
term relationship we intend to forge with our suppliers. We therefore require all suppliers of goods and
services to comply with these principles and ensure compliance by their own suppliers in turn.
Suppliers are required to comply with and to ensure their own suppliers and subcontractors comply with
applicable laws, as well as principles equivalent to those set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the fundamental Conventions of the International Labour Organization, the United Nations
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, United Nations Global Compact, the Voluntary
Principles on Security and Human Rights, and the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises. Effective
policies and procedures must be implemented, in particular with respect to the principles set out below.
We also expect our suppliers to continuously improve their performance on these subjects.
Principle 1: Respect human rights at work
Ensure that working conditions and remuneration of workers preserve human dignity and are consistent
with the principles defined by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and by the fundamental
Conventions of the International Labour Organization.
Prohibition and prevention of child labour
▪ Prohibit employment of workers under the age of 18 for hazardous and night work and prohibit
employment of workers under the age of 15, except where local law provides for greater protection
for the child.
Prohibition and prevention of forced labour
▪ Ensure that no worker is coerced to work against her/his will through the use of violence, intimidation,
financial coercion or threat of penalty or sanction.
▪ Prohibit confiscation of workers’ identity documents, provided that where local law requires such
document to be retained, workers must have immediate and automatic access to such documents.
▪ Ensure that no recruitment fees are charged to the worker.
Working conditions, remuneration and compensation
▪ Establish an employment contract.
▪ Provide a living wage and ensure compliance with a maximum number of working hours, adequate
rest time and parental leave.
▪ Document compliance with such requirements.
Page 36 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
Health and Safety at work
▪ Provide a healthy and safe workplace where workers are protected from accidents, injuries, and work-
caused illness.
▪ When accommodation is provided by the employer, ensure that it is safe, clean and adequate as a
living space.
Prohibition and prevention of discrimination and harassment at the workplace
▪ Prohibit harassment and practices resulting in discriminatory treatment of workers with particular
attention to recruitment, compensation, benefits, or termination.
Freedom of speech, association and collective bargaining, freedom of thought, conscience, and religion
▪ Allow workers to choose whether to be member of a collective bargaining organization. In countries
where such right is restricted, ensure employees have the right to participate in a dialogue about their
collective work situation.
Grievances and Concerns
▪ Ensure workers can express grievances and concerns without fear of reprisal.
Principle 2: Protect health, safety, and security
Put in place an appropriate health, safety and security management system:
▪ Perform risk analysis and implement appropriate means and action plans to prevent those risks.
▪ Establish a system for monitoring events that occurred in these areas.
▪ Implement incident response plans and means of intervention designed to face different types of
events the supplier may encounter.
▪ Carry out a periodic review of the relevant policies and measures and institute suitable control
measures.
Principle 3: Act in favor of climate
▪ Implement an energy efficiency management system.
▪ Continuously seek to reduce greenhouses gas emissions from operations, products, and services.
Principle 4: Preserve the environment
Protection of the environment
▪ Limit the impact of industrial activities on the environment, including possible impacts on air quality,
water resources and soils.
Page 37 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
▪ Implement a systematic approach to define measurable environmental objectives, achieve them, and
demonstrate that they have been achieved.
▪ Implement an appropriate environment risk management system based on the Avoid-Reduce-
Compensate mitigation hierarchy in order to identify and control the environmental impact of
activities, products or services.
▪ More generally, undertake the improvements needed for protecting the environment.
Promotion of circular economy and responsible use of natural resources
▪ Ensure that natural resources (water, soil, forests…) are used efficiently.
▪ Continuously seek to minimize waste production.
▪ Apply the “reduce, reuse, recycle, valorize” principles.
Protection of biodiversity
▪ Ensure that no production site possibly having detrimental impact on the environment is located in
natural protected areas listed as categories I to IV by the International Union for Conservation of
Nature, in wetlands designated under the Ramsar International Convention or in sites inscribed on
the inventory of the World Heritage Natural Sites of UNESCO.
▪ Continuously seek to minimize biodiversity impact of operations, products and services applying the
Avoid-Reduce-Compensate mitigation hierarchy.
Principle 5: Prevent corruption, conflict of interests, and fight against fraud
▪ Prevent and ban any form of corruption: active or passive, private or public, direct or indirect.
▪ Fight against fraud.
▪ Avoid conflicts of interest, in particular, when personal interests may influence professional interests.
Principle 6: Respect competition law
▪ Comply with the applicable competition law.
Principle 7: Promote economic and social development
▪ Create a climate of trust with stakeholders, engaging in a dialogue with local communities.
▪ Promote local sustainable development initiatives.
▪ Give local companies the opportunity to develop their business.
Compliance with these laws and principles may be audited.
Suppliers are required to cooperate with the audit process.
Page 38 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
SCHEDULE 3.7 – HYGIENE, SAFETY, AND THE ENVIRONMENT POLICY
1 Definitions
Commencement Date means the date when Supplier is requested to be ready to perform its obligations
under the Contract.
Environment: soil, subsoil, water, air, species and their habitats and interactions.
HSE: hygiene, safety and the environment.
HSE Event : an HSE Incident, a Near-Miss or an abnormal situation or action including those that deviate
from a standard, specification, procedure or rule.
HSE Incident : any sudden event on a given date which causes injury, illness or death, damage to assets
or property, loss of production, or harm to the Environment or to Customer or any of its Affiliates’
corporate image.
HSE Management System means one of the components of the global management system of a Party
contributing to the management of the HSE risks involved in any of its activity related to the Contract or
the performance of its obligations under the Contract. It includes the organisational structure, the
planning activities, the responsibilities, practices, procedures, processes and resources (i.e. property and
equipment and Personnel) for establishing, implementing, reviewing and maintaining the HSE policy and
continuously improving the HSE performances.
Near-Miss : any event not constituting an HSE Incident but which, in slightly different circumstances,
might have generated identical consequences to those of an HSE Incident.
Resources means tools, devices or machinery necessary to perform Supplier’s obligations under the
Contract.
2 General
2.1 Customer places and requires Supplier to place the highest importance and priority on HSE matters
at all levels of its organization during the performance of the Contract.
2.2 In performing its obligations under the Contract, Supplier shall at its own cost, and shall cause its
Subcontractors to, take all the appropriate precautions and measures to (i) safeguard the health of
the people that may be affected by the performance of the Contract, (ii) ensure high safety levels
in performing the Contract, (iii) avoid or mitigate negative impacts on the environment and
(iv) protect Customer’s property, equipment and personnel at the Site.
3 HSE Compliance
3.1 In performing its obligations under the Contract, Supplier shall comply, and shall cause its
Subcontractors to comply, with:
(a) All Applicable Laws relating to HSE matters;
(b) The HSE standards that would be expected in accordance with Good Industry Practice;
(c) Customer’s Golden Rules for safety at work;
(d) The rules, regulations and operating procedures prevailing on the Site with respect to
HSE matters and Site access conditions;
(e) Any process and procedures relating to simultaneous operations and work permits on
the Site;
Page 39 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
(f) HSE plans, work authorizations and other associated permits (including hot work
permit, confined space entry permit, digging permit);
(g) Any specific requirements set out in this Schedule “Hygiene, Safety and the
Environment”.
3.2 Supplier shall take into account any additional opportunities to reduce risks in terms of HSE.
4 Supplier’s Corporate HSE Policy and HSE Management System
4.1 Supplier shall maintain and implement a corporate HSE policy consistent with Good Industry
Practice in HSE matters and with Customer’s HSE policy.
4.2 Supplier shall maintain and implement a HSE Management System consistent with its Corporate
HSE Policy and with Customer’s HSE management system, including all relevant procedures to
ensure:
(a) prevention and mitigation of HSE risks;
(b) compliance with the provisions of Article 3 of this Schedule;
(c) monitoring, and reporting to Customer, of the implementation of the requirements of
this Schedule “Hygiene, Safety and the Environment”, and monitoring progress against
HSE objectives pre-established by Supplier;
(d) the qualification and the ability of Supplier’s Personnel to carry out the required tasks
and the correct maintenance and adaptedness of processes, tools, materials and the
equipment to the HSE risks associated with the performance of the Contract.
4.3 Supplier shall give evidence of its Corporate HSE Policy and HSE Management System and their
implementation upon request of Customer. Where the HSE Management System has been
certified, information to be provided with respect to such certification shall include level and
duration of certification. Any modification relating to such certification shall be communicated
without delay to Customer.
4.4 Data on Supplier’s HSE performance at the Site may be used freely by Customer for regular internal
and/or external reporting or publication.
5 HSE Plan
5.1 Before the Commencement Date, Supplier shall:
(a) perform a Site visit and survey to assess the HSE conditions;
(b) perform a HSE risk analysis, using adequate analysis methods, and covering all HSE
risks likely to result from the performance of the Contract. Such HSE risk analysis shall
fully take into account any information made available by Customer concerning local
specificities impacting HSE;
(c) on the basis of the above, establish a HSE Plan consistent with the provisions of this
Schedule, and setting out the HSE requirements (namely all the appropriate
precautions and measures to prevent and mitigate HSE risks) relevant to the
specificities of the Contract, taking into account all Supplier’s procedures necessary for
the proper performance of the Contract.
5.2 The HSE Plan shall be drawn up and communicated to Customer before the Commencement Date.
Page 40 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
5.3 Any modification to the HSE Plan during the course of the Contract shall be communicated to
Customer before starting the concerned work.
5.4 Supplier shall be responsible for performing its obligations under the Contract in compliance with
the HSE Plan.
6 Supplier HSE Organisation
6.1 Supplier shall give evidence to Customer upon its request that it has an organization and all the
necessary resources to adequately implement Supplier HSE Plan.
6.2 Supplier shall ensure that Supplier’s Personnel are aware of and committed to its Corporate HSE
Policy, its HSE Management System, the HSE Plan and the task risk assessments required under
Article 7 of this Schedule.
6.3 Supplier shall appoint a HSE representative responsible for (i) supervising and monitoring the
implementation of Supplier HSE Plan and the HSE rules in force at the Site and (ii) communicating
with Customer. Supplier shall inform Customer of the contact details of such HSE representative.
6.4 Supplier shall be responsible for ensuring at its own cost the safety of all personnel involved in the
performance of the Contract. This shall include, inter alia, the providing of appropriate personal
protective equipment.
6.5 Supplier shall demonstrate to Customer upon its request evidence of a safety information handover
system for shifts and crew change and shall be responsible for its implementation.
6.6 Supplier shall set up a medical fitness control policy and shall be responsible for its implementation.
Supplier shall, and shall cause its Subcontractors to, perform all relevant and timely assessments to
ensure that Supplier’s Personnel involved in the performance of its obligations under the Contract
are medically fit for the job they are assigned to.
6.7 The medical fitness files of Supplier’s Personnel must be available for presentation at all times to
all competent authorities in the course of the performance of the Contract.
6.8 The language used in managing all HSE issues shall be appropriate to ensure proper communication
among Supplier’s Personnel and with Customer’s personnel.
7 Work permit process
7.1 Supplier undertakes to comply with the work permit process applicable on the Site.
7.2 Within this framework, Supplier shall in particular:
(a) Provide Supplier’s Personnel with initial training on the work permit process and keep
their skills maintained over time;
(b) Ensure that the hazards related to the tasks have been formally identified, and that
the associated risks have been analysed and assessed;
(c) Not start performing any of its obligations under the Contract without holding a duly
validated work permit wherever such permit is required;
(d) Promptly stop the intervention and inform Customer in the event of discrepancy
between the conditions set out in the work permit and the actual conditions of the
intervention.
8 Communication with Customer
Page 41 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
8.1 Supplier shall set up and implement a HSE monitoring and reporting system for Customer’s benefit.
Such system shall, inter alia, allow the reporting to Customer of any HSE Event as provided at Article
14 of this Schedule and of any risk likely to modify the HSE risk analysis provided at Article 5 of this
Schedule.
8.2 Where relevant, prior to the commencement of performance of the obligations under the Contract,
Customer and Supplier shall cooperate in implementing HSE measures with the aim of preventing
HSE risks related to simultaneous operations.
8.3 Supplier shall actively participate in any HSE meetings organised by Customer at kick-off and/or
during the course of the Contract.
9 Hazardous substances and materials, waste
9.1 All procedures involving the handling, storage, use or disposal of hazardous substances or materials,
as defined by the Applicable Laws, for the performance of the Contract shall be addressed in the
HSE Plan.
9.2 Supplier shall also take into account any list of hazardous substances and materials present on the
Site, made available by Customer, as well as any assessment of the related HSE risks.
9.3 Customer reserves the right to deny Supplier the right to use certain hazardous substances or
materials at the Site.
9.4 Supplier shall ensure that the safety data sheets and any other hazard information corresponding
to any hazardous substances and materials used in the performance of the Contract shall be at all
times available at Site to Customer.
9.5 Supplier shall set up an efficient waste management system complying with the Applicable Laws
and with any specifications provided by Customer.
10 Environment
10.1 Supplier shall identify and evaluate all potential impacts on the Environment related to the
performance of the Contract and shall implement all appropriate measures to prevent and/or
mitigate these impacts. These measures shall be included in the HSE Plan.
11 Subcontractors
11.1 Supplier shall select its Subcontractors through an appropriate HSE qualification process having due
regard to their HSE performance, their ability to implement an HSE policy consistent with Supplier’s
Corporate HSE Policy.
11.2 Supplier shall cause its Subcontractors to maintain and implement a HSE management system that
is compatible with that of Supplier.
11.3 Supplier shall ensure that its Subcontractors are capable of complying with requirements identical
to those set out in this Schedule.
11.4 Supplier shall set up and implement a system allowing it to monitor the HSE performance of its
Subcontractors as well as their compliance with requirements identical to those set out by the
provisions of this Schedule.
11.5 Supplier shall ensure that the HSE roles and responsibilities between Supplier and the
Subcontractors are clearly defined.
12 Competency and Training
Page 42 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
12.1 Supplier shall inform Customer of the presence of any new Personnel, namely Personnel having less
than six (6) months experience in the relevant type of activities or less than six (6) months presence
on the Site and shall provide such new Personnel with an appropriate HSE support plan.
12.2 Supplier shall ensure that the HSE awareness of Supplier’s Personnel is continuously maintained
and enhanced through an appropriate training plan.
12.3 Supplier shall ensure that Supplier’s Personnel attend any HSE induction program requested by
Customer.
12.4 Before the start of the Contract, Supplier shall inform Supplier’s Personnel assigned to perform its
obligations under the Contract of the risks and measures implemented.
12.5 Supplier shall ensure that Supplier’s Personnel hold at all times the certificates of proficiency
necessary or useful to perform the obligations under the Contract.
12.6 Upon request by Customer, Supplier shall demonstrate that Supplier’s Personnel have been
provided a HSE training relevant for the performance of the obligations under the Contract at the
Site, including a test on Customer’s Golden Rules for safety at work. The content of the HSE training
and certificates shall be made available to Customer upon request.
13 Emergency preparedness
13.1 Upon request by Customer, Supplier shall communicate to Customer an emergency response
procedure and have due regard to any comment by Customer.
13.2 Supplier shall ensure that Supplier’s Personnel on the Site participate in any Site emergency drill
organized by Customer and in programmed safety exercises.
14 HSE Event management
14.1 Supplier shall without delay report to Customer any HSE Event on the Site or occurring during the
performance of the Contract, taking into account the actual or potential severity of the HSE Event.
14.2 Upon the occurrence of an HSE Event, Supplier shall:
(a) take without delay all the necessary corrective and preventive measures to mitigate
the effects of the HSE Event and prevent any new HSE Event, including if necessary by
initiating modification of the HSE Supplier Plan;
(b) provide Customer with all relevant information related to the HSE Event and assist
Customer in the gathering of evidence and analysis of the causes of the HSE Event;
(c) take full account of the findings of the analysis of the causes within its HSE
Management System and the HSE Plan.
14.3 Any member of Supplier’s Personnel who believes that a task, whether or not a part of Supplier’s
obligations under the Contract, is unsafe or could lead to an HSE Event, shall be entitled, with no
personal repercussion, to request the suspension of such task until resolution of the concern.
14.4 Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 17 of this Schedule, Customer reserves the right to
direct any emergency response measures.
14.5 In case of an illness or bodily injury or search and rescue operations involving Supplier’s Personnel,
Customer will endeavour to provide assistance to Supplier’s Personnel. Supplier shall defend,
indemnify and hold harmless Customer and any of its Affiliates from any claim arising out of or in
Page 43 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
connection with Customer or any of its Affiliates providing, failing or inability to provide such
assistance and/or the performance of such operations.
14.6 The costs of such assistance provided by Customer to Supplier’s Personnel shall be borne by
Supplier.
15 HSE Audits
15.1 Supplier shall include in the HSE Plan and perform periodical inspections and internal HSE audits of
Supplier’s Personnel and Supplier’s Resource during the performance of the Contract at the Site.
The observations made during these audits must be communicated to Customer and translated into
a regularly reviewed action plan.
15.2 Supplier shall regularly audit the performance of its HSE Management System and its
implementation.
Audits may be conducted by Customer under Clause 12 on any HSE aspect of the performance of
the obligations under the Contract.
15.3 Supplier shall conduct regular safety observations, covering all of Supplier’s Personnel involved in
the performance of its obligations under the Contract. The results of its observations must be
communicated to Customer.
16 Site clean-up
16.1 Upon completing all or part of the obligations under the Contract on the Site, Supplier shall remove,
at its own expense and responsibility:
(a) all Supplier’s Resource;
(b) temporary installations;
(c) any wreck, debris and generally any waste; and,
(d) unless otherwise agreed, any surplus of materials.
16.2 Supplier shall clean up and, where relevant, restore and rehabilitate the Site in compliance with this
Schedule.
16.3 If Supplier fails to satisfy the above requirements, Customer, following prior notification to Supplier,
shall have the right to perform (or have performed) removal, clean-up, restoration and
rehabilitation operations at Supplier’s cost and expense, at any time.
17 Consequences of non-compliance
17.1 Without prejudice to any other provision of the Contract, in the event of non-compliance by
Supplier with any of the provisions of this Schedule, Customer:
(a) may promptly notify Supplier that Customer is or will take, at Supplier’s expense, all
appropriate measures to correct such non-compliance should Supplier fail to meet its
obligations without delay or within the time set out by Customer;
(b) reserves the right to deny access to, or the continued presence of, Supplier or any
member of Supplier’s Personnel on the Site;
(c) may suspend the performance of any or all parts of its obligations under the Contract
in accordance with the provisions of the Contract;
(d) may terminate the Contract in accordance with the provisions of Clause 19 of the GTs.
Page 44 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
17.2 In the event of a fatality on the Site, Customer may suspend the performance of any or all parts of
the obligations under the Contract in accordance with the Contract.
Page 45 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
SCHEDULE 3.8 – INSURANCES
Insurance product and Sum insured
coverage
General and public liability 2.500.000 euros
/ third party liability
Products liability or 2.500.000 euros
Professional Liability
insurance
Employer’s legal liability /
worker’s compensation
Automobile Public Liability
Insurance (whenever
automobiles and
automotive equipment
are employed by Supplier
for the performance of the
Contract)
Other insurance policies
mandatory in the country
of the Site :
-
Page 46 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
SCHEDULE 3.9 – CYBERSECURITY REQUIREMENTS
Model contract X (Insert number)
The Cybersecurity Requirements applicable to this Contract are as follows:
☐ Requirements for Type 3 contracts: 1 to 21
☐ Requirements for Type 2 contracts: 1 to 54
☐ Requirements for Type 1 contracts: 1 to 64
Please tick a box
NB: Plan d’Assurances Sécurité (PAS) model must be added at the end of this appendix for contract type
1 or 2. PAS model is available on Agora in French ref n°E064 and in English ref n°E065
PREAMBLE
These Cybersecurity requirements set the minimum and standard framework of the rules that must be
respected by the Supplier and its possible subcontractors in the context of the execution of the Contract.
These rules must be specified in the Security Insurance Plan for Type 1 and Type 2 Contracts.
They can be specified for Type 3 Contracts in a Security Insurance Plan.
Page 47 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
Cybersecurity Requirements shall not prevail over or defeat the application of (i) applicable laws and
regulations relating to the Cybersecurity of Systems and data and (ii) more precise and stringent applicable
rules relating to the Cybersecurity of Systems and Data, such as certifications to standards such as ISO,
ETSI or European Cybersecurity applicable to the Supplier, its products, procedures and/or services, the
Internal Rules and the rules otherwise agreed by the Parties.
It is recalled that certain Information Systems and their Resources, due to their sensitivity, may be subject
to specific regulations, in particular in terms of confidentiality (e.g. defence secrecy), technical, human and
organizational obligations, control and Audit, qualification and accreditation, alert and crisis management,
etc. Specific Internal Rules (including the Information Systems Security Policy) as well as specific
contractual rules will also apply and prevail over these Cybersecurity Requirements.
References to the Supplier must be understood as including the Supplier and its subcontractors, the
Supplier's obligations extending to the Information Systems and Resources of its subcontractors.
Page 48 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
1 Requirements for Types 1, 2 and 3 contracts
1. Classify Contract-Specific Resources Knowledge of
Resources
The Supplier must identify the various Contract-Specific Resources and establish, in collaboration
with the Customer and based on the Customer's reference system, a Classification of these
Resources.
2. Analyze Cybersecurity Risks on Contract-Specific Resources Cybersecurity Risk
Management
The Supplier must carry out and keep up-to-date Cybersecurity Risk Analysis of the Contract-
Specific Resources, including the data processed by these Resources, according to a mutually
agreed method of analysis.
The Supplier must be able to provide at any times a detailed report on all the Risks identified,
classified by sensitivity, the means of prevention or mitigation and to reveal the residual Risks.
3. Apply an action plan to reduce the identified Risks Cybersecurity Risk
Management
The Supplier must put in place, at its own expense, an action plan in connection with the analysis
of Cybersecurity Risks, or the results of a Cybersecurity Audit, to reduce or prevent the occurrence
of these Cybersecurity Risks or to limit their consequences.
The Supplier must implement the necessary remediation measures following the notifications by
the Customer as part of its data leakage program.
4. Raise awareness of Cybersecurity among personnel Cybersecurity
Awareness and
Training
The Supplier must conduct awareness-raising actions among the personnel involved in the
performance of the Contract (including subcontractors), to ensure that they are aware of the
Cybersecurity rules to be applied to ensure the protection of the Contract-Specific Resources.
Page 49 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
5. Protect Contract-Specific Resources against Malicious Code Protection against
malicious code
The Supplier must put in place, for its Contract-Specific Resources, a protection device against
the Malicious Codes.
6. Manage Incidents related to Malicious Codes Protection against
malicious code
The Supplier must define and implement processes and procedures for the managing Threats and
Malicious Codes. The Supplier is required to comply with its contractual and legal obligations
about reporting Security Incidents to the Customer, including the breach of personal or non-
personal data.
7. Harden the system base of Contract-Specific Resources Security of system
bases, workstations,
and mobile
equipment
The Supplier must implement the necessary and relevant technical, human, and organizational
Measures, to ensure the security of the base Systems (operating Systems, middleware,
applications and related communication and security services) of the Contract-Specific
Resources. These Measures must make it possible to preserve the confidentiality, availability and
integrity of the data processed.
8. Protect Contract-Specific Resources data Data protection
Security of system
bases, workstations,
and mobile
equipment
The Supplier must document and implement the necessary and relevant means to secure the
administration, maintenance, and operation of the System bases (operating Systems, middleware,
applications and related communication and security services) of the Contract-Specific Resources.
9. Secure the mobile devices used for the Contract Security of mobile
systems,
workstations, and
equipment
The Supplier must ensure the existence of specific and appropriate Measures for the security of
its mobile devices (all types of connected equipment) used by its personnel (and/or those of its
subcontractors) in the context of the execution of the Contract.
Page 50 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
10. Secure the digital media used for the Contract Security of Digital
media
The Supplier must put in place Measures to protect the digital media on which the Customer Data
resulting from the execution of the Contract is copied, saved and/or archived (backup).
Computer media must be subject to a formalized Classification and must be in line with the type
of data copied, backed up and/or archived (backup).
The inventory of computer media must be available and kept up to date. Backup and computer
archiving media must be secured and protected against illegal acts and environmental Risks. The
transport of computer media must be subject to a documented procedure.
11. Protect network access used under the Contract Network Security
The Supplier must deploy and update the security Measures, necessary, relevant, and in
accordance with the State-of-the-art, to ensure the security of the networks used by the Contract-
Specific Resources, to prevent or limit the consequences of Cybersecurity Risks.
12. Use the means of Authentication provided Administration of
Contract-Specific
Resources
The Supplier will use the means of Authentication made available by the Company to access the
Customer's Information Systems.
The means of Authentication to access the Contract-Specific Resources must be previously
validated by the Customer.
13. Remedy Vulnerabilities in Contract-Specific Resources Remediation
Management
The Supplier must define and implement a Remediation process to correct vulnerabilities and
misconfigurations of The Contract-Specific Resources.
14. Apply an authorization procedure for access to Contract-Specific Logical access
Resources controls and
Authorizations
The management of logical access to Contract-Specific Resources, implemented by the Supplier
for the purposes of the Contract, must be described in a Security Assurance Plan (if any) or in a
document sent to the Customer before the start of the Services/Supply and each time it is updated.
Access to the Customer's Information System is subject only to the Customer's rules and
procedures.
Page 51 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
15. Alert in case of a Major Security Incident Cybersecurity
Incident
Management
Major Security Incidents must be reported to the CERT TotalEnergies within four (4) hours from
the moment the Supplier becomes aware of them, specifying in particular the nature and extent of
the Major Security Incident, proven and potential, as well as any information to enable the
Customer to assess the consequences for himself.
The Supplier actively collaborates with the Customer and regularly updates and completes this
information.
16. Respond to requests from a crisis unit of the Client Cybersecurity
Incident
Management
The Supplier must have a crisis management organization allowing it to respond to requests from
the Customer's crisis unit as soon as possible.
17. Ensure availability of Contract-Specific Resources Business Continuity
Requirements
The Supplier must assess the Risks of unavailability of the Contract-Specific Resources that could
be detrimental to the Customer.
The Supplier must implement solutions (technical, human, and organizational) covering the
scenarios of unavailability identified, and making it possible to ensure the minimum level of
service required by the Customer in a crisis situation and the resumption of service under
conditions that comply with the tolerance thresholds defined with the Customer.
18. Document the continuity of business related to the Contract Business Continuity
Requirements
The Supplier must carry out systematic tests of its organizational, human, and technical solutions
for ensuring business continuity and disaster recovery, at the end of their implementation or
evolution, supplemented by tests and regular exercises to evaluate the functioning of all the
continuity and disaster recovery plans that it has defined.
The Supplier must obtain the Customer’s written consent before conducting any tests and
exercises based on a partial or complete and programmed shutdown of the Contract-Specific
Resources or its other Resources necessary for the Supply (including any switch to backup
systems).
All testing and exercises of disaster recovery and business continuity devices must follow
protocols documented by Supplier. Their execution must be the subject of a balance sheet
showing the results in accordance with expectations and /or anomalies detected,which the
Supplier must transmit to the Customer and which will be commented in Security Committee
meeting.
Page 52 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
19. Favor the use of collaborative tools Collaborative tools
& shared
Workspaces
In its exchanges with the Customer, the Supplier must use, as far as possible, the collaborative
work tools suggested or made available to it by the Customer. In certain cases, in particular for
reasons of confidentiality, the Supplier will be obliged to use the collaborative work tools of the
Client.
20. Delete e-mail messages and documents related to the Contract at Collaborative tools &
the end of the Contract share Workspaces
Unless otherwise stipulated in a contractual document that takes precedence over these
requirements and unless there is a mandatory legal obligation or for the purposes of certifying the
product or service that is the subject of the Contract, the Supplier must delete from its own
Resources, including Contract-Specific Resources, Customer Data and electronic messages and
documents, within a maximum period of one month from the termination of the Contract for any
reason whatsoever.
21. Comply with rules governing messaging and collaborative tools Collaborative tools
& shared
Workspaces
The Supplier must comply with the rules of good practice associated with messaging and
collaborative tools provided to it by the Customer.
Page 53 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
2 Additional requirements for Type 1 and Type 2 contracts
22. Define Cybersecurity roles and responsibilities Cybersecurity
Governance
The Supplier must implement Cybersecurity governance to guarantee the level of security
expected by the Customer and to meet all Cybersecurity requirements, general and specific,
provided for in the Contract and all its annexes. In the event of subcontracting, the Supplier must
establish its own governance with its subcontractors.
This Governance is based in particular on the Supplier's participation in the Security Committee
(SECCO) to meet according to the terms defined by the parties in a Security Insurance Plan (SIP).
The topics of the Security Committee will focus on the achievement of the security levels expected
of the Customer, the Security Incidents that have occurred, any security derogations impacting
the Customer, ongoing Security Incidents, the results of Audits or certifications conducted.
Action plans resulting from Risk analyses or Cybersecurity Audits must be reviewed during the
Security Committees.
The processes of Remediation, detection and reaction must be validated by the Security
Committee.
Cybersecurity
23. Appoint a security officer
Governance
The Supplier must designate a security officer.
This security officer is the single point of contact for security throughout the duration of the
Contract. It must be easily reachable by the Customer, in a secure manner and the means of
communication must be established at the start of the Contract.
The participation of the security officer in the Security Committee is mandatory.
24. Appoint a Remediation officer Cybersecurity
Governance
The Supplier must designate, within its teams, a person responsible for the application of the
Remediation, in relation to the Customer.
Page 54 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
25. Produce qualification evidence Supplier’s
Cybersecurity
Certifications
The Supplier must produce any certification / accreditation / label / reference to the Customer
supporting its competence, in particular in the Cybersecurity’s domain as well as that of its
employees and subcontractors within the scope of the Contract. Evidence of defined qualification
imposed within a specific regulatory framework must also be made available.
26. Maintaining Cybersecurity Qualifications Supplier’s
Cybersecurity
Certifications
The Supplier is responsible for maintaining the required certifications, accreditations and labels.
Cybersecurity certifications required under the Contract must be valid for at least the duration of
the Contract.
27. Notify in case of any loss of qualification Supplier’s
Cybersecurity
Certifications
The Supplier must notify the Customer as soon as possible, and at the latest within seven (7)
working days, in the event of loss of accreditation, label or certification, whether a "Company"
certification or one or more required certifications applying to the personnel, equipment, services
or processes of the Supplier or that of its subcontractors.
28. Audit the Cybersecurity of Contract-Specific Resources Cybersecurity
Audits
Supplier must conduct Cybersecurity Audits of Contract-Specific Resources.
These Audits mainly concern compliance with the requirements set out in this document.
They may also relate to the security Measures applicable to specific regulations, such as those
applicable to the processing of personal data.
These Audits do not exclude the application of other contractual provisions relating to Audits of the
Supplier's Resources and Information Systems, including pen testing / red team Audits. These Audits are
the responsibility of the Supplier, unless otherwise agreed in advance by the Parties.
Page 55 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
29. Transmit Cybersecurity Audit results Cybersecurity
Audits
The results of the Audits carried out by the Supplier on the Contract-Specific Resources will be
communicated to the Customer. An Audit certificate, as well as a summary of the Audit report and
the progress of the Remediation and improvement actions, will be given free of charge to the
Customer no later than thirty (30) working days after the date of the Audit report. All Remediation
and improvement actions will be at the expense of the Supplier.
30. Map Contract-Specific Resources Knowledge of
Resources
Supplier must map the Contract-specific Resources implemented under the Contract in the form
of architectural schematics and must maintain an inventory detailing the main features necessary
to maintain security.
This mapping must be validated by the Security Committee.
31. Maintain contract-specific resource mapping up to date Knowledge of
Resources
The Supplier must maintain the mapping of the Contract-specific Resources up to date.
Major changes must be presented to the Security Committee within a sufficient and reasonable
time before being implemented.
32. Train actors on the classification of Contract-Specific Resources Knowledge of
Resources
The Supplier must train any actor involved in the use or management of the Contract-Specific
Resources on the Classification Profile of these Resources.
Administrators must master with the applicable Security Measures.
33. Train personnel on Cybersecurity issues Cybersecurity
Awareness and
Training
The Supplier must ensure that the employees assigned to the performance of the Contract
(including subcontractors' stakeholders) acquire the knowledge and skills required for the
performance of the tasks entrusted to them and the issues related to Cybersecurity.
The Supplier must undertake the necessary training actions to maintain the skills of all employees
and stakeholders concerned.
The Supplier must, on request, provide evidence of the existence of an awareness and training
programme.
Page 56 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
34. Protect physical access to Contract-Specific Resources Categorization of
security zones
The Supplier must ensure that the physical security Measures adapted to the level of sensitivity of
the Contract-Specific Resources, including data processed under the Contract, and in accordance
with applicable regulations, are in place.
The Supplier must ensure the protection of physical access to the various security zones in which
the Contract-Specific Resources are located by means of graduated and relevant devices
depending on the type of zone to be secured.
The Supplier must ensure that the monitoring and control Measures for physical access protection
devices are in place.
35. Ensure the provision of essential services for Contract-Specific Protection against
Resources environmental
Risks
The Supplier must ensure the installation and proper maintenance of the electrical supply, air
conditioning and protection of the Contract-Specific Resources.
36. Fire protection Protection against
environmental
Risks
The Supplier must ensure the implementation of fire safety Measures to protect the Contract-
Specific-Resources.
These Measures must include, in particular:
- Fire detection means.
- Fire suppression means.
- Measures for periodic verification of the means of protection and firefighting.
- Procedures to be implemented in the event of fire.
The Supplier must communicate to the Customer the list of fire protection Measures put in place.
37. Protection against water damage Protection against
environmental
Risks
The Supplier must ensure the implementation of the water damage protection Measures.
The Supplier must communicate to the Customer the list of water damage protection Measures
put in place.
38. Provide a periodic status report on efforts to combat Malicious Protection against
code. Malicious Code
The Supplier must regularly present to the Security Committee a quantitative (completeness) and
qualitative (effectiveness) monitoring report of the means of combating Malicious Code deployed
to protect the Contract-Specific Resources, according to a periodicity to be defined at the time of
the firs Security Committee.
Page 57 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
39. Secure the workstations used under the Contract Security of mobile
systems,
workstations, and
equipment
The Supplier must ensure the hardening of the workstations used by its personnel (and/or
subcontractors) in the context of the performance of the Contract so that this equipment does not
constitute a vector of breach of the security of the Resources used for the performance of the
Contract (e.g. theft of equipment resulting in the disclosure of confidential information or the loss
of essential data, the propagation of Malicious Code or the logical intrusion and illicit access to
sensitive Resources).
40. Transmit Events generated by a Cybersecurity Incident impacting Traceability and
Contract-Specific Resources monitoring
The Supplier must transmit to the Customer's Security Operation Center (SOC), at first request
and within a time frame adapted to the situation that generated the request, all Events associated
with a Cybersecurity Incident impacting the Contract-Specific Resources.
These Events must be addressed to the Customer’s technical means of logging.
41. Implement a Security Operations Center (SOC) Traceability and
monitoring
The Supplier must monitor through a Security Operation Center (SOC) the Contract-Specific
Resources that are not integrated into Customer's SOC.
The Supplier must establish, at the start of the contract, a communication protocol between its
SOC and that of the Customer.
42. Track Administrator Actions on Contract-Specific Resources Administration of
Contract-Specific
Resources
The Supplier must ensure that the actions of the administrative accounts used on the Contract-
Specific Resources are logged, retained for a default period of twelve (12) rolling months, and that
Events are Audited for suspicious activities or actions.
43. Provide reporting on Remediation actions within the scope of the Remediation
Contract Management
The Supplier must draw up and provide, according to the terms and frequency defined in the
Security Insurance Plan, the reports defined by the Security Committee.
44. Coordinate Remediation within contractual deadlines Remediation
Management
The Supplier must implement the necessary means to apply the Remediations on the Contract-
Specific-Resources, within the deadlines defined in the Security Insurance Plan for the
Vulnerability Levels "Critical” or “P0”, “Urgent” or “P1”, and Standard (default).
The P0 and P1 remediations are defined by the CERT TotalEnergies and communicated to the
Supplier.
Page 58 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
45. Specify security Measures to meet requirements for contract- Design –
specific resource evolutions implementation –
evolution of
Contract-Specific
Resources
The Supplier must specify and document the security Measures to be implemented to respond, as
part of the design and/or evolution projects of the Contract-Specific Resources, the levels of
security and continuity of service required by the Customer.
The Supplier must alert the Customer of a possible inability to offer Security Measures to meet the
required security requirements.
46. Validate the Cybersecurity Measures implemented Design –
implementation –
evolution of
Contract-Specific
Resources
The Supplier must proceed, prior delivery, to the technical verification of the Cybersecurity
Measures implemented and return these results to the Customer at the end of each control
campaign. Where applicable, this report will mention the deviations from the previously validated
security specifications and the identified residual security Risks.
47. Separate Production Information Systems environments from non- Design –
production environments implementation –
evolution of
Contract-Specific
Resources
The Supplier must ensure the separation of the environments of production Information Systems
and non-production Information Systems. Production data must not be used in non-production
environments without the prior written consent of the Customer.
48. Comply with best practices in secure development Design –
implementation –
evolution of
Contract-Specific
Resources
The programs and applications developed by the Supplier under the Contract must comply with
the State of The Art, in terms of security of computer developments and in particular the
recommendations of ENISA, ANSSI and OWASP (Open Web Application Security Project). These
best practices are described in the Security Insurance Plan and are validated by the Security
Committee.
The Provider will also apply the principles of "security by design", "security by default",
considering, where appropriate, the specificities imposed by the processing of personal data.
The Customer may provide a specific requirements document on Cybersecurity according to the
technologies implemented.
Page 59 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
49. Report Cybersecurity Incidents Cybersecurity
Incident
Management
The Supplier must notify the CERT TotalEnergies of any incident affecting or likely to affect the
Cybersecurity of the Contract-Specific Resources, within the deadlines and according to the terms
agreed contractually or in application of a regulation, this period being fixed in default at a
maximum of twenty-four hours from the moment when the Supplier becomes aware of the
Cybersecurity Incident.
50. Implement a Cybersecurity Incident Management Process Cybersecurity
Incident
Management
The Supplier must put in place the technical, human, and organizational means to detect, alert,
support and remedy Cybersecurity alerts or Incidents, and in particular to report to the Customer
Cybersecurity Incidents concerning the Contract-Specific Resources or the Customer Data used
under the Contract, to react effectively according to the nature and severity of the Incidents
detected, to limit their impacts and to resolve quickly and formally all Cybersecurity Incidents.
51. Implement a Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) Cybersecurity
Incident
Management
The Supplier must describe in the Security Insurance Plan its response organization to a
Cybersecurity Incident, equivalent to an organization of a CERT (Computer Emergency Response
Team) for the monitoring and response to Cybersecurity Incidents involving Contract-Specific
Resources that are not integrated into SOC and CERT devices of TotalEnergies. It designates a
contact point capable of reporting to the CERT TotalEnergies.
The Supplier must establish a communication protocol between its CERT and that of the Customer.
52. Emergency Backup Business
Continuity
The Supplier must carry out separate production backups and backup backups covering all the
Contract-Specific Resources (configuration of System, network and telecommunications
equipment, basic software, applications, and Customer data).
The Supplier must outsource the backup (used as part of the execution of continuity plans) to a
location sufficiently distant from the production site not to suffer damage from a disaster that
could impact it. The Supplier must ensure the ability to permanently access all emergency
backups, regardless of their storage location.
Page 60 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
53. Protect the Customer’ data used in the context of the Contract Collaborative tools
& shared spaces
The Supplier must ensure that all data and documents relating to the Customer (including
Customer Data or those generated by the service defined in the Contract or inventory data) remain
on the dedicated and secure environments defined in the Security Insurance Plan.
The transfer of data or documents outside these environments is strictly prohibited. In particular,
the documents and messages exchanged under the Contract must not be communicated to third
parties without the prior consent of the Customer.
54. Encrypt e-mail messages Collaborative tools
& shared spaces
The Supplier must encrypt the messages exchanged with the Customer, according to the means
described in the Security Insurance Plan.
Page 61 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
3 Additional requirements for Type 1 contracts
55. Transmit Events allowing Cybersecurity monitoring of certain Traceability and
Contract-Specific Resources monitoring
If necessary, the Security Committee can define the feared Events and detection scenarios (logs,
events or detection rules) to be transmitted to the Customer's SOC so that it is able to detect the
occurrence. These events generated by Contract-Specific Resources must be addressed to the
Customer's log collection systems.
56. Hold administrators accountable Administration of
Contract-Specific
Resources
The Supplier must ensure that its personnel (and those of its subcontractors) assigned to
administrators’ functions are held accountable for its actions carried inherent in the privileges
granted.
The process of hold administrators accountable of theirs actions must be formalized
(documented) and traceable.
57. Protect passwords for Contract-Specific Resources Administration of
Contract-Specific
Resources
The personnel assigned to the Contract must protect their passwords and their means of
Authentication, in accordance with the methods validated by the Security Committee and alert
without delay the Security Operation Center (SOC) of the Customer in case of compromise or
suspicion of compromise.
58. Secure Contract-Specific Resource administration flows Administration of
Contract-Specific
Resources
The Supplier must use the means and methods of access validated by the Security Committee to
administer the Contract-Specific Resources.
The Supplier undertakes not to attempt to circumvent the Security Measures put in place by the
Client.
Page 62 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
59. Ensure that administrator workstations always remain secure Administrator
Workstation
Management
The Supplier must ensure that the workstations used for administration are maintained in a safe
condition throughout the duration of the Contract, and in particular kept up to date and free of
viruses or Malicious Code in order not to represent a Threat to the Company Information System.
60. Restrict Internet access from administrator’s workstations Administrator
Workstation
Management
The accounts of administrators and workstations used for administration must be configured to
limit access to the Internet (e-mail, browsing) to the strict needs necessary for the performance of
the Contract.
61. Apply the principle of least privilege for administrators Administrator
Workstation
Management
Supplier's employees (and those of its subcontractors) with administrator rights must have
personal and unique accounts (no shared accounts) and respect the separation of roles for
administrator actions.
Administrator rights must be assigned and managed in accordance with the principle of least
privilege.
62. Encrypt administrator workstation data Administrator
Workstation
Management
All storage media used for the administration of the Customer Information System must be
encrypted.
Administrator sessions must be automatically interrupted after a specified period of inactivity and
in accordance with the State of The Art.
63. Ensure the physical security of administrator workstations Administrator
Workstation
Management
The Supplier must ensure that it implements anti-theft devices and the prevention of visual
indiscretions.
Administrator operations must under no circumstances be carried out in a space open to the
public or visible to the public.
Page 63 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
64. Provide reporting on Cybersecurity Incidents Cybersecurity
Incident
Management
The Supplier must reports relating to CyberSecurity Incidents up to date and submit them to the
Customer according to the periodicity and with the information provided for in the Security
Insurance Plan.
4 Terms and definitions
The terms defined below apply only to security requirements – they may in no way be used or used
as a reference in the other contractual documents of the Contract.
Audit: set of checks to ensure the compliance of the Supplier, its services or goods, with its legal and
contractual obligations in terms of Cybersecurity.
Types of Audits: organizational, compliance, configuration, and technical (intrusion, code review ...)
Authentication: A method of verifying the identity of a user accessing the Information System.
CERT (Computer Emergency Response Team) TotalEnergies: The IT emergency response team
responsible for coordinating incident response and Cybersecurity assessment between TotalEnergies
entities and TotalEnergies subsidiaries. See https://totalenergies.com/cert
Classification: The classification of a Resource by the Customer provides the Supplier with a concise
indication of its importance and the need for an appropriate level of protection.
Classification Profile: The classification approach, which consists in assigning a value corresponding to
the potential impact of the Risks likely to affect the Resources analyzed according to the three criteria
considered.
Each Resource is therefore assigned, for each of the Availability, Integrity and Confidentiality criteria, a
sensitivity level (0=Low impact level to 4=High impact level)
Contract: Refers to all the documents governing the contractual relationship between the Supplier and the
Customer for a defined service.
Contract-Specific Resources: Includes Resources under the responsibility of the Supplier and its
subcontractors Supplier that are implemented specifically for the Contract, including in particular the
workstations of the employees involved in the Contract and the Resources dedicated to the execution of
the Contract Supplier.
Customer Data: data, including personal data, to which the Supplier has access under the Contract, as
well as data (including logs and metadata) generated by the Systems.
Cybersecurity: All the technical and organizational Measures necessary and proportionate to protect the
Company's Information Systems and Resources, the Contract-Specific Resources, Customer Data, users
and third parties that could be impacted, against events or actions likely to compromise the availability,
authenticity, integrity or confidentiality of the Information Systems and Resources, as well as the Customer
Data and the services they offer or make accessible.
Cybersecurity Incident: Any Event observed likely to call into question the Cybersecurity or the normal
functioning of a Resource of the Information System (or a service provided by the IS function) of the
Page 64 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
Customer or a Contract-Specific Resources and likely to affect the availability, the integrity or confidentiality
of the relevant Resource or Customer Data. .
Enterprise Information Systems (EIS): EIS is Information Systems comprising services and applications
intended for business management (office automation, human resources, customer relations, finance,
treasury, purchasing, etc.).
Event: Information generated by a component of the Information System that is recorded in a log.
Industrial Information Systems (IIS): IIS is Information Systems comprising Systems and components
that contribute directly to the production processes, integrity, safety and security of sites (command control
systems, laboratory management, technical management Systems, etc.).
Information System: An organized set of Resources for processing data and providing services. The
Information System is essential to the Company's activities. It includes the Enterprise Information System
(EIS) and the Industrial Information System (IIS).
Internal Rules: Refers to the Customer's rules, in particular, any internal rules and procedures specific to
the Information System(s) or the Customer's sites transmitted by the Customer to the Supplier or
accessible from the Customer's Intranet.
Major Cybersecurity Incident: Any Cybersecurity Incident with consequences, according to the levels
indicated in the Security Insurance Plan.
Malicious Code: Any program developed for the purpose of harming or by means of a computer System
or a network.
(Cybersecurity) Measure: Means to manage a Risk, which may be of an administrative, technical,
managerial, or legal nature, including in particular the policy, procedures, guidelines and organizational
practices or structures.
Privileged Access: Authorization to access a Resource to perform resource administration operations
(e.g. read the configuration, modify the configuration, execute a command reserved for an administrator,
delete files ...).
Remediation: Implementation of security means or Measures to resolve errors, flaws, defects, or failures
in Cybersecurity.
Resource (of the Information System): Includes all or part of the means, services and processes involved
in the operation of the Customer Information System, such as, in particular, applications, data, technical
means, equipment, networks (local, corporate, etc.). It is specified that the Resources include the means,
services and processes of the Suppliers who participate in the Customer's Information System, including
Cloud or SaaS service providers, service providers in charge of managed or outsourced services, etc.
(Cybersecurity) Risk: A Risk characterized by:
• a Threat or malicious action of internal or external origin on Information Systems.
• a Threat or non-malicious action, such as a failure, negligence or error of the Information Systems.
Security Committee (SECCO): Decision-making and monitoring body for action plans and Cybersecurity
indicators.
Security Insurance Plan (SIP): Document describing the terms of execution of the Contract from a
Cybersecurity point of view. This document describes the Cybersecurity indicators, the Cybersecurity
organization and the specific Cybersecurity Measures put in place.
Security Operation Center (SOC): A Security Operations Center (SOC) is a centralized function within an
organization that employs people, processes, and technologies to continuously monitor and improve the
organization's security posture while preventing, detecting, analyzing, and responding to Cybersecurity
Incidents.
Page 65 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
State of Art: Principles and fundamental notions of the security of Information Systems described in
particular in standards (ISO, IEC) and texts published by official bodies (ANSSI, NIST, ENISA).
Strong Authentication: Authentication based on at least 2 of the following:
• a secret known to the user only (password, PIN);
• an object owned by the user (card generating one-time passwords, smart card, USB key);
• a physical characteristic of the user (fingerprint, retinal fingerprint, hand structure, or any other
biometric element).
Systems: refers to the Information Systems of the Customer or the Supplier used in the context of the
Contract.
(Cybersecurity) Threat: Potential cause of a Cybersecurity Risk, which can harm an Information System
or an organization.
Vulnerability Levels: The CERT defines and specifies the levels of vulnerability (e.g. P0, P1, Standard)
and which are included in the Security Assurance Plan if applicable.
End of document.
Page 66 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
PART 4 – SPECIFIC TERMS
The Parties agree that the GTs shall be amended as follows, and that such amendments in this PART 4 –
Specific Terms shall take precedence over the GTs:
# Clause reference Amendment
1.
2.
Page 67 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
PART 5/A– FORM OF LOCAL IMPLEMENTATION CONTRACT
LOCAL IMPLEMENTATION CONTRACT IN RELATION TO THE MASTER CONTRACT
FOR THE SUPPLY OF GOODS AND/OR SERVICES REF__________
This contract “Local Implementation Contract” is made on the ___ day of ___________(the “Effective
Date”) between the following parties:
[NAME OF TOTALENERGIES COMPANY], a company incorporated under the laws of [insert jurisdiction of
incorporation], whose registered office is located at [insert company’s registered address], registered
under company number [insert company’s company registration number] (Customer); and
[NAME OF SUPPLIER], a company incorporated under the laws of [insert jurisdiction of incorporation],
whose registered office is located at [insert company’s registered address], registered under company
number [insert company’s company registration number] (Supplier).
WHEREAS:
A. [Name of Customer Signatory] and [Name of Supplier Signatory], entered into a Master Contract
dated [insert date] for the provision of certain Goods and/or Services with reference number
[insert reference number] (hereinafter the “Master Contract”).
B. Customer and Supplier wish to supplement and/or amend the provisions of the Master Contract
by setting out in more detail the Terms and Conditions governing the supply of Goods and/or
Services, which shall apply to all Orders that the Customer places with the Supplier.
C. [To be completed on a case by case basis.]
Now in consideration of the mutual promises set out in this Contract, the Parties hereby agree as
follows:
ARTICLE 1- DEFINITIONS
Terms defined in the Master Agreement shall have the same meaning in this Local Implementation
Contract (unless expressly stated otherwise). In this Local Implementation Contract the following
expressions shall have the following meanings:
[To be completed]
ARTICLE 2 - ORDERS
From the Effective Date, the terms of this Local Implementation Contract shall apply to all Orders between
Customer and Supplier for the provisions of Goods and/or Services pursuant to the Master Contract.
Page 68 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
ARTICLE 3 - CONTRACTUAL DOCUMENTS
The following parts shall be deemed to form, and be read as part of, the Local Implementation Contract,
following a decreasing order of priority:
(a) the present document and any Schedules attached thereto; and
(b) the Master Contract and any Schedules attached thereto.
The parts shall be read as one document. If any conflict, inconsistency or ambiguity exists between the
parts, the order of precedence indicated above shall apply.
ARTICLE 4 - TERM
The Local Implementation Contract shall apply from the Effective Date and remain in full force and effect
until termination or expiry of the Master Contract.
ARTICLE 5 - LOCAL TERMS
Part 3 – General Terms and Part 4 – Specific Terms of the Master Contract shall be amended as follows,
and such amendments shall take precedence over such terms of the Master Contract:
# Clause reference Amendment
1.
2.
ARTICLE 6 - NOTICES
The addresses for service of notice in accordance with this Local Implementation Contract or any Order
pursuant thereto shall be, or otherwise notified by each Party:
Supplier Customer
[insert address details] [insert address details]
[insert telephone details] [insert telephone details]
[insert email details] [insert email details]
The authorised representatives of the Parties have executed the Local Implementation Contract upon
the dates indicated below:
Page 69 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
For: For:
(Supplier) (Customer)
Name: __________________ Name: __________________
Title: __________________ Title: __________________
Date: __________________ Date: __________________
Page 70 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved
PART 5/B – LOCAL TERMS
The Parties agree that the GTs shall be amended as follows, and that such amendments in this PART 5/B
– Local Terms shall take precedence over the GTs:
# Clause reference Amendment
1.
2.
Page 71 sur 71
Master Contract for Supply of Goods and/or Services_ 20231231
TOTALENERGIES - All rights reserved